Journal of Machine Learning Research 5 (2004) 1471–1530               Submitted 10/03; Revised 10/04; Published 11/04




           Variance Reduction Techniques for Gradient Estimates in
                          Reinforcement Learning

Evan Greensmith                                                                      EVAN @ CSL . ANU . EDU . AU
Research School of Information Sciences and Engineering
Australian National University
Canberra 0200, Australia
Peter L. Bartlett                                                          BARTLETT @ STAT. BERKELEY. EDU
Computer Science Division & Department of Statistics
UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
Jonathan Baxter                                                                   JBAXTER @ PANSCIENT. COM
Panscient Pty. Ltd.
10 Gawler Terrace
Walkerville, SA 5081, Australia


Editor: Michael Littman


                                                          Abstract
      Policy gradient methods for reinforcement learning avoid some of the undesirable properties of
     the value function approaches, such as policy degradation (Baxter and Bartlett, 2001). However,
     the variance of the performance gradient estimates obtained from the simulation is sometimes ex-
     cessive. In this paper, we consider variance reduction methods that were developed for Monte
     Carlo estimates of integrals. We study two commonly used policy gradient techniques, the baseline
     and actor-critic methods, from this perspective. Both can be interpreted as additive control variate
     variance reduction methods. We consider the expected average reward performance measure, and
     we focus on the GPOMDP algorithm for estimating performance gradients in partially observable
     Markov decision processes controlled by stochastic reactive policies. We give bounds for the esti-
     mation error of the gradient estimates for both baseline and actor-critic algorithms, in terms of the
     sample size and mixing properties of the controlled system. For the baseline technique, we compute
     the optimal baseline, and show that the popular approach of using the average reward to define the
     baseline can be suboptimal. For actor-critic algorithms, we show that using the true value function
     as the critic can be suboptimal. We also discuss algorithms for estimating the optimal baseline and
     approximate value function.
     Keywords: reinforcement learning, policy gradient, baseline, actor-critic, GPOMDP


1. Introduction
The task in reinforcement learning problems is to select a controller that will perform well in some
given environment. This environment is often modelled as a partially observable Markov decision
process (POMDP); see, for example, Kaelbling et al. (1998); Aberdeen (2002); Lovejoy (1991).
At any step in time this process sits in some state, and that state is updated when the POMDP is
supplied with an action. An observation is generated from the current state and given as information
to a controller. A reward is also generated, as an indication of how good that state is to be in.

c 2004 Evan Greensmith, Peter L. Bartlett and Jonathan Baxter.
                               G REENSMITH , BARTLETT AND BAXTER




The controller can use the observations to determine which action to produce, thereby altering the
POMDP state. The expectation of the average reward over possible future sequences of states
given a particular controller (the expected average reward) can be used as a measure of how well
a controller performs. This performance measure can then be used to select a controller that will
perform well.
    Given a parameterized space of controllers, one method to select a controller is by gradient
ascent (see, for example, Glynn, 1990; Glynn and L‘Ecuyer, 1995; Reiman and Weiss, 1989; Ru-
binstein, 1991; Williams, 1992). An initial controller is selected, then the gradient direction in the
controller space of the expected average reward is calculated. The gradient information can then be
used to find the locally optimal controller for the problem. The benefit of using a gradient approach,
as opposed to directly comparing the expected average reward at different points, is that it can be
less susceptible to error in the presence of noise. The noise arises from the fact that we estimate,
rather than calculate, properties of the controlled POMDP.
    Determining the gradient requires the calculation of an integral. We can produce an estimate
of this integral through Monte Carlo techniques. This changes the integration problem into one of
calculating a weighted average of samples. It turns out that these samples can be generated purely
by watching the controller act in the environment (see Section 3.3). However, this estimation tends
to have a high variance associated with it, which means a large number of steps is needed to obtain
a good estimate.
    GPOMDP (Baxter and Bartlett, 2001) is an algorithm for generating an estimate of the gradient
in this way. Compared with other approaches (such as the algorithms described in Glynn, 1990;
Rubinstein, 1991; Williams, 1992, for example), it is especially suitable for systems with large state
spaces, when the time between visits to a recurrent state is large but the mixing time of the controlled
POMDP is short. However, it can suffer from the problem of high variance in its estimates. We seek
to alter GPOMDP so that the estimation variance is reduced, and thereby reduce the number of steps
required to train a controller.
    One generic approach to reducing the variance of Monte Carlo estimates of integrals is to use
an additive control variate (see, for example, Hammersley and Handscomb, 1965; Fishman, 1996;
Evans and Swartz, 2000). Suppose we wish to estimate the integral of the function f : X → R, and
we happen to know the value of the integral of another function on the same space ϕ : X → R. As
we have                          Z         Z                    Z
                                    f(x) = (f(x) − ϕ(x)) + ϕ(x)                                      (1)
                                 X          X                   X
the integral of f(x) − ϕ(x) can be estimated instead. Obviously if ϕ(x) = f(x) then we have managed
to reduce our variance to zero. More generally,

                            Var( f − ϕ) = Var( f ) − 2Cov( f , ϕ) + Var(ϕ).

If ϕ and f are strongly correlated, so that the covariance term on the right hand side is greater than
the variance of ϕ, then a variance improvement has been made over the original estimation problem.
    In this paper, we consider two applications of the control variate approach to the problem of
gradient estimation in reinforcement learning. The first is the technique of adding a baseline, which
is often used as a way to affect estimation variance whilst adding no bias. We show that adding a
baseline can be viewed as a control variate method, and we find the optimal choice of baseline to
use. We show that the additional variance of a suboptimal baseline can be expressed as a certain
weighted squared distance between the baseline and the optimal one. A constant baseline, which

                                                 1472
                       VARIANCE R EDUCTION OF G RADIENT E STIMATES IN RL




does not depend on the state, has been commonly suggested (Sutton and Barto, 1998; Williams,
1992; Kimura et al., 1995, 1997; Kimura and Kobayashi, 1998b; Marbach and Tsitsiklis, 2001). The
expectation over all states of the discounted value of the state has been proposed, and widely used,
as a constant baseline, by replacing the reward at each step by the difference between the reward and
the average reward. We give bounds on the estimation variance that show that, perhaps surprisingly,
this may not be the best choice. Our results are consistent with the experimental observations of
Dayan (1990).
     The second application of the control variate approach is the use of a value function. The
discounted value function is usually not known, and needs to be estimated. Using some fixed, or
learnt, value function in place of this estimate can reduce the overall estimation variance. Such
actor-critic methods have been investigated extensively (Barto et al., 1983; Kimura and Kobayashi,
1998a; Baird, 1999; Sutton et al., 2000; Konda and Tsitsiklis, 2000, 2003). Generally the idea
is to minimize some notion of distance between the value function and the true discounted value
function, using, for example, TD (Sutton, 1988) or Least-Squares TD (Bradtke and Barto, 1996).
In this paper we show that this may not be the best approach: selecting a value function to be equal
to the true discounted value function is not always the best choice. Even more surprisingly, we
give examples for which the use of a value function that is different from the true discounted value
function reduces the variance to zero, for no increase in bias. We consider a value function to be
forming part of a control variate, and find a corresponding bound on the expected squared error (that
is, including the estimation variance) of the gradient estimate produced in this way.
    While the main contribution of this paper is in understanding a variety of ideas in gradient
estimation as variance reduction techniques, our results suggest a number of algorithms that could
be used to augment the GPOMDP algorithm. We present new algorithms to learn the optimum
baseline, and to learn a value function that minimizes the bound on the expected squared error of
a gradient estimate, and we describe the results of preliminary experiments, which show that these
algorithms give performance improvements.


2. Overview of Paper

Section 3 gives some background information. The POMDP setting and controller are defined, and
the measure of performance and its gradient are described. Monte Carlo estimation of integrals,
and how these integrals can be estimated, is covered, followed by a discussion of the GPOMDP
algorithm, and how it relates to the Monte Carlo estimations. Finally, we outline the control variates
that we use.
     The samples used in the Monte Carlo estimations are taken from a single sequence of observa-
tions. Little can be said about the correlations between these samples. However, Section 4 shows
that we can bound the effect they have on the variance in terms of the variance of the iid case (that
is, when samples are generated iid according to the stationary distribution of the Markov chain).
    Section 5 derives results for a baseline control variate in the iid setting, using results in Section 4
to interpret these as bounds in the more general case. In particular, we give an expression for the
minimum variance that may be obtained, and the baseline that achieves this minimum variance. The
section also compares the minimum variance against the common technique of using the expectation
over states of the discounted value function, and it looks at a restricted class of baselines that use
only observation information.

                                                   1473
                                G REENSMITH , BARTLETT AND BAXTER




    Section 6 looks at the technique of replacing the estimate of the discounted value function with
some value function, in a control variate context. It shows that using the true discounted value
function may not be the best choice, and that additional gains may be made. It also gives bounds on
the expected squared error introduced by a value function.
    Section 7 presents an algorithm to learn the optimal baseline. It also presents an algorithm to
learn a value function by minimizing an estimate of the resulting expected squared error. Section 8
describes the results of experiments investigating the performance of these algorithms.

3. Background
Here we formally define the learning setting, including the performance and its gradient. We then
give an intuitive discussion of the GPOMDP algorithm, starting with its approximation to the true
gradient, and how it may be estimated by Monte Carlo techniques. Finally, we introduce the two
variance reduction techniques studied in this paper.

3.1 System Model
A partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP) can be modelled by a system consisting
of a state space, S , an action space, U , and an observation space, Y , all of which will be considered
finite here. State transitions are governed by a set of probability transition matrices P(u), where
u ∈ U , components of which will be denoted pi j (u), where i, j ∈ S . There is also an observation
process ν : S → PY , where PY is the space of probability distributions over Y , and a reward function
r : S → R. Together these define the POMDP (S , U , Y , P, ν, r).
     A policy for this POMDP is a mapping µ : Y ∗ → PU , where Y ∗ denotes the space of all finite
sequences of observations y1 , . . . , yt ∈ Y and PU is the space of probability distributions over U . If
only the set of reactive policies µ : Y → PU is considered then the joint process of state, observation
and action, denoted {Xt ,Yt ,Ut }, is Markov. This paper considers reactive parameterized policies
µ(y, θ), where θ ∈ RK and y ∈ Y . A reactive parameterized policy together with a POMDP defines
a controlled POMDP (S , U , Y , P, ν, r, µ). See Figure 1.


                                       Px (ut )    xt ν(x )
                                                           t
                                            t

                                           6
                                                      r(xt )
                                      environment
                               ut                                    rt yt

                                                                -


                                                 µ(θ, yt ) -
                                      controller
                           Average Reward: η = limT →∞ E T1 ∑t=0
                                                             T −1
                                                                       
                                                                  r(Xt )


                        Figure 1: POMDP with reactive parameterized policy

                                                   1474
                        VARIANCE R EDUCTION OF G RADIENT E STIMATES IN RL




    Given a controlled POMDP the subprocess of states, {Xt }, is also Markov. A parameterized
transition matrix P(θ), with entries pi j (θ), can be constructed, with

                  pi j (θ) = Ey∼ν(i) Eu∼µ(y,θ) [pi j (u)] = ∑ νy (i)µu (y, θ)pi j (u),
                                                        
                                                             y∈Y ,u∈U

where νy (i) denotes the probability of observation y given the state i, and µu (y, θ) denotes the proba-
bility of action u given the parameters θ and an observation y. The Markov chain M(θ) = (S , P(θ))
then describes the behavior of the process {Xt }.
     We will also be interested in the special case where the state is fully observable.

Definition 1. A controlled Markov decision process is a controlled POMDP (S , U , Y , P, ν, r, µ)
with Y = S and νy (i) = δyi , where
                                          
                                            1       y=i
                                    δyi =
                                            0 otherwise,

and is defined by the tuple (S , U , P, r, µ) .

     In this case the set of reactive policies contains the optimal policy, that is, for our performance
measure there is a reactive policy that will perform at least as well as any history dependent policy.
Indeed, we need only consider mappings to point distributions over actions. Of course, this is not
necessarily true of the parameterized class of reactive policies. In the partially observable setting
the optimal policy may be history dependent; although a reactive policy may still perform well. For
a study of using reactive policies for POMDPs see Singh et al. (1994); Jaakkola et al. (1995); Baird
(1999). For a recent survey of POMDP techniques see Aberdeen (2002).
     We operate under a number of assumptions for the controlled POMDP (S , U , Y , P, ν, r, µ). Note
that any arbitrary vector v is considered to be a column vector, and that we write v0 to denote
its transpose, a row vector. Also, the operator ∇ takes a function f(θ) to a vector of its partial
derivatives, that is
                                                 ∂f(θ)       ∂f(θ) 0
                                                                 
                                     ∇f(θ) =           ,...,         ,
                                                  ∂θ1         ∂θK
where θk denotes the kth element of θ.

Assumption 1. For all θ ∈ RK the Markov chain M(θ) = (S , P(θ)) is irreducible and aperiodic
(ergodic), and hence has a unique stationary distribution π(θ) satisfying

                                              π(θ)0 P(θ) = π(θ)0

    The terms irreducible and aperiodic are defined in Appendix A. Appendix A also contains
a discussion of Assumption 1 and how both the irreducibility and aperiodicity conditions may be
relaxed.

Assumption 2. There is a R < ∞ such that for all i ∈ S , |r(i)| ≤ R.

Assumption 3. For all u ∈ U , y ∈ Y and θ ∈ RK the partial derivatives

                                       ∂µu (y, θ)
                                                  ,    ∀k ∈ {1, . . . , K}
                                         ∂θk

                                                      1475
                               G REENSMITH , BARTLETT AND BAXTER




exist and there is a B < ∞ such that the Euclidean norms

                                                    ∇µu (y, θ)
                                                    µu (y, θ)

                                                                    we may have µu (y, θ) = 0
are uniformly bounded by B. We interpret 0/0 to be 0 here, that is, q
provided k∇µu (y, θ)k = 0. The Euclidean norm of a vector v is given by                        ∑k v2k .

    Note that Assumption 3 implies that

                                               ∇pi j (θ)
                                                         ≤ B,
                                               pi j (θ)

where, as in Assumption 3, we interpret 0/0 to be 0, and so we may have pi j (θ) = 0 provided
k∇pi j (θ)k = 0. This bound can be seen from


                           ∇pi j (θ)   =        ∇        ∑           νy (i)µu (y, θ)pi j (u)
                                                     y∈Y ,u∈U


                                       =              ∑            νy (i)∇µu (y, θ)pi j (u)
                                                y∈Y ,u∈U

                                       ≤ B             ∑           νy (i)µu (y, θ)pi j (u)
                                                y∈Y ,u∈U
                                       = Bpi j (θ).

    A useful measure of the system’s performance is the expected average reward,
                                                "            #
                                                  1 T −1
                                                     ∑ r(Xt ) .
                                       def
                                  η(θ) = lim E                                                            (2)
                                           T →∞   T t=0

 From Equation (24) in Appendix A we see that η(θ) = E[r(X)|X ∼ π(θ)], and hence is independent
of the starting state. In this paper we analyze certain training algorithms that aim to select a policy
such that this quantity is (locally) maximized.
    It is also useful to consider the discounted value function,
                                                 "                    #
                                                         T −1
                                                             ∑ βt r(Xt ) X0 = i .
                                       def
                              Jβ (i, θ) = lim E
                                             T →∞
                                                             t=0

Throughout the rest of the paper the dependence upon θ is assumed, and dropped in the notation.

3.2 Gradient Calculation
It is shown in Baxter and Bartlett (2001) that we can calculate an approximation to the gradient of
the expected average reward by
                                      ∇β η = ∑ πi ∇pi j Jβ ( j),
                                                    i, j∈S


                                                       1476
                          VARIANCE R EDUCTION OF G RADIENT E STIMATES IN RL




 and that the limit of ∇β η as β approaches 1 is the true gradient ∇η. Note that ∇β η is a parameterized
vector in RK approximating the gradient of η, and there need not exist any function f(θ) with
∇f(θ) = ∇β η.
    The gradient approximation ∇β η can be considered as the integration over the state transition
space,                                  Z
                                         ∇β η =                      πi ∇pi j Jβ ( j)C(di×d j),                                    (3)
                                                      (i, j)∈S ×S

where C is a counting measure, that is, for a countable space C , and a set A ⊂ C , we have C(A) =
card(A) when A is finite, and C(A) = ∞ otherwise. Here card(A) is the cardinality of the set A. It is
unlikely that the true value function will be known. The value function can, however, be expressed
as the integral over a sample path of the chain, as Assumption 1 implies ergodicity.
              Z
     ∇β η =                             πi0 (∇pi0 i1 ) pi1 i2 pi2 i3 . . . r(i1 ) + βr(i2 ) + β2 r(i3 ) + · · · C(di0 ×. . .).
                                                                                                               
              (i0 ,i1 ,...)∈S ×S ×...

To aid in analysis, the problem will be split into an integral and a sub integral problem.
                  Z              Z
     ∇β η =                                           πi (∇pi j ) δx1 j px1 x2 . . . (r(x1 ) + · · ·) C(dx1 ×. . .)C(di×d j)
                   (i, j)∈S ×S     (x1 ,...)∈S ×...
                  Z                               Z
            =                    πi (∇pi j )                         δx1 j px1 x2 . . . (r(x1 ) + · · ·) C(dx1 ×. . .)C(di×d j).
                   (i, j)∈S ×S                    (x1 ,...)∈S ×...


3.3 Monte Carlo Estimation
Integrals can be estimated through the use of Monte Carlo techniques by averaging over samples
taken from a particular distribution (see Hammersley and Handscomb, 1965; Fishman, 1996; Evans
and Swartz, 2000). Take   a function f : X → R and a probability distribution ρ over the space X . An
unbiased estimate of x∈X f(x) can be generated from samples {x0 , x1 , . . . , xm−1 } taken from ρ by
                     R


                                                             1 m−1 f(xn )
                                                               ∑ ρ(xn ) .
                                                             m n=0

     Consider a finite ergodic Markov chain M = (S , P) with stationary distribution π. Generate the
Markov process {Xt } from M starting from the stationary distribution. The integral of the function
f : S → R over the space S can be estimated by

                                                             1 T −1 f(Xt )
                                                                ∑ πX .
                                                             T t=0     t


This can be used to estimate the integral
                                              Z
                                                             πi ∇pi j Jβ ( j)C(di×d j).
                                               (i, j)∈S ×S

The finite ergodic Markov chain M = (S , P), with stationary distribution π, can be used to create
the extended Markov process {Xt , Xt+1 } and its associated chain. Its stationary distribution has the
probability mass function ρ(i, j) = πi pi j , allowing the estimation of the above integral by
                                                                                   ∞
                                     1 T −1 ∇pXt Xt+1
                                       ∑ pX X Jt+1 ,
                                     T t=0
                                                                            Jt = ∑ βs−t r(Xs ).                                    (4)
                                              t t+1                               s=t


                                                                     1477
                                    G REENSMITH , BARTLETT AND BAXTER




In addition to the Monte Carlo estimation, the value function has been replaced with an unbiased
estimate of the value function. In practice we would need to truncate this sum; a point discussed in
the next section. Note, however, that
                    "                     #
                      1 T −1 ∇pXt Xt+1           1 T −1     ∇pXt Xt+1
                                                                                
                  E      ∑ pX X Jt+1 = T ∑ E pX X E [ Jt+1 | Xt+1 ]
                      T t=0     t t+1              t=0        t t+1
                                                  "                          #
                                                     1 T −1 ∇pXt Xt+1
                                             = E        ∑ pX X Jβ (Xt+1 ) .
                                                     T t=0    t t+1


    We will often be looking at estimates produced by larger Markov chains, such as that formed by
the process {Xt ,Yt ,Ut , Xt+1 }. The discussion above also holds for functions on such chains.

3.4 GPOMDP Algorithm
The GPOMDP algorithm uses a single sample path of the Markov process {Zt } = {Xt ,Yt ,Ut , Xt+1 }
to produce an estimate of ∇β η. We denote an estimate produced by GPOMDP with T samples by
∆T .
                                 T −1 ∇µ (Y )                 T
                           def 1
                                 ∑      Ut t
                                                      Jt = ∑ βs−t r(Xs ).
                                                         def
                        ∆T =                   Jt+1 ,                                         (5)
                               T t=0 µUt (Yt )               s=t
 This differs from the estimate given in (4), but can be obtained similarly by considering the estima-
tion of ∇β η by samples from {Zt }, and noting that
                                        ∇pi j =     ∑        νy (i)∇µu (y)pi j (u).
                                                  y∈Y ,u∈U

    GPOMDP can be represented as the two dimensional calculation
          ∆T = T1
                                                                                                             
                     f(Z0 ) J1 +                f(Z1 ) J2 +               ···         + f(ZT −1 ) JT
                              =   def                    def
                                                         =                      ..                =    def
                                                                                 .
                              g(Z0 )                     g(Z1 )                  ..                g(ZT −1 )
                                                                                  .
                              + βg(Z1 )                  + βg(Z2 )
                              + β2 g(Z2 )                          ..
                                                                    .
                                           ..
                                            .            + βT −2 g(ZT −1 )
                                  + βT −1 g(Z   T −1 )

where f(Zt ) = (∇µUt (Yt ))/µUt (Yt ) and g(Zt ) = r(Xt+1 ).
    One way to understand the behavior of GPOMDP is to assume that the chains being used to
calculate each Jt sample are independent. This is reasonable when the chain is rapidly mixing and
T is large compared with the mixing time, because then most pairs Jt1 and Jt2 are approximately
                                                                     (ind)
independent. Replacing Jt by these independent versions, Jt , the calculation becomes
      (ind) def            (ind)                  (ind)                                       (ind) 
    ∆T = T1 f(Z0 ) J1             +       f(Z1 ) J2        +             ···     + f(ZT −1 ) JT
                          = def                          =def                ..                          =   def
                                                                              .                          
                           g(Z00 )                g(Z10 )                     ..              g Z(T −1)0
                                                                               .
                           + βg(Z01 )              + βg(Z11 )
                           + β2 g(Z02 )                        ..
                                                                .

                                                     β  T −2
                                                                           
                                      ..
                                       .           +         g    Z1(T −2)
                           + βT −1 g Z0(T −1)
                                               


                                                          1478
                            VARIANCE R EDUCTION OF G RADIENT E STIMATES IN RL




where the truncated process {Ztn } is an independent sample path generated from the Markov chain
of the associated POMDP starting from the state Zt = Zt0 .
    The truncation of the discounted sum of future rewards would cause a bias from ∇β η. By
considering T to be large compared to 1/(1 − β) then this bias becomes small for a large proportion
                                   (ind)                             (est)
of the samples. Replacing each Jt        by an untruncated version, Jt , shows how GPOMDP can
be thought of as similar to the calculation

        (est) def 1                (est)                        (est)                                         (est)
      ∆T
                                                                                                                      
              = T         f(Z0 ) J1          + f(Z1 ) J2                   + ···               + f(ZT −1 ) JT
                                  =   def                       =def                     ..                  =  def
                                                                                          .                             
                                   g(Z00 )                      g(Z10 )                   ..                 g Z(T −1)0
                                                                                           .
                                   + βg(Z01 )                   + βg(Z11 )                                   + βg Z(T −1)1 
                                                                                                                           

                                   + β2 g(Z02 )                 + β2 g(Z12 )                                 + β2 g Z(T −1)2
                                              ..                           ..                                             ..
                                               .                            .                                              .




    The altered ∆T sum can be written as

                                                               1 T −1 ∇µUt (Yt ) (est)
                                                                 ∑ µU (Yt ) Jt+1 .
                                                   (est)
                                               ∆T          =                                                                   (6)
                                                               T t=0    t



3.5 Variance Reduction
Equation (1) shows how a control variate can be used to change an estimation problem. To be of
benefit the use of the control variate must lower estimation variance, and the integral of the control
variate must have a known value. We look at two classes of control variate for which the value of
the integral may be determined (or assumed).
    The Monte Carlo estimates performed use correlated samples, making it difficult to analyze the
variance gain. Given that we wish to deal with quite unrestricted environments, little is known about
this sample correlation. We therefore consider the case of iid samples and show how this case gives
a bound on the case using correlated samples.
    The first form of control variate considered is the baseline control variate. With this, the integral
shown in Equation (3) is altered by a control variate of the form πi ∇pi j b(i).
           Z                                                           Z
                          πi ∇pi j Jβ ( j)C(di×d j) =                                   πi ∇pi j Jβ ( j) − b(i) C(di×d j)
                                                                                                               
            (i, j)∈S ×S                                                 (i, j)∈S ×S
                                                                                    Z
                                                                                +                 πi ∇pi j b(i)C(di×d j)
                                                                                    (i, j)∈S ×S

The integral of the control variate term is zero, since
                            Z

                              (i, j)∈S ×S
                                            πi ∇pi j b(i)C(di×d j) =                     ∑ πi b(i)∇ ∑ pi j
                                                                                         i∈S           j∈S

                                                                                =        ∑ πi b(i)∇(1)
                                                                                         i∈S
                                                                                = 0.                                           (7)

Thus, we are free to select an arbitrary b(i) with consideration for the variance minimization alone.

                                                                    1479
                               G REENSMITH , BARTLETT AND BAXTER




   The second form of control variate considered is constructed from a value function, V( j), a
mapping S → R.
   Z                                    Z
            πi ∇pi j Jβ ( j)C(di×d j) =          πi ∇pi j Jβ ( j) − Jβ ( j) − V( j) C(di×d j)
                                                                                   
     (i, j)∈S ×S                             (i, j)∈S ×S
                                                      Z
                                                                     πi ∇pi j Jβ ( j) − V( j) C(di×d j)
                                                                                             
                                                  +
                                                       (i, j)∈S ×S

The integral of this control variate (the last term in the equation above) is the error associated with
using a value function in place of the true discounted value function. The task is then to find a value
function such that the integral of the control variate is small, and yet it still provides good variance
minimization of the estimated integral.
    Note that the integrals being estimated here are vector quantities. We consider the trace of the
covariance matrix of these quantities, that is, the sum of the variance of the components of the
vector. Given the random vector A = (A1 , A2 , . . . , Ak )0 , we write
                        k
               Var(A) = ∑ Var(Am ) = E (A − E [A])0 (A − E [A]) = E (A − E [A])2 ,
                                                                 h            i

                        m=1

where, for a vector a, a2 denotes a0 a.

4. Dependent Samples
                                                                             (est)
In Sections 5 and 6 we study the variance of quantities that, like ∆T (Equation (6)), are formed
from the sample average of a process generated by a controlled (PO)MDP. From Section 3 we know
this process is Markov, is ergodic, and has a stationary distribution, and so the sample average is
an estimate of the expectation of a sample drawn from the stationary distribution, π (note that, as
in Section 3.3, we can also look at samples formed from an extended space, and its associated
stationary distributions). In this section we investigate how the variance of the sample average
relates to the variance of a sample drawn from π. This allows us to derive results for the variance of
a sample drawn from π and relate them to the variance of the sample average. In the iid case, that
is, when the process generates a sequence of samples X0 , . . . , XT −1 drawn independently from the
distribution π, we have the relationship
                                                 !
                                       1 T −1          1
                                 Var     ∑ f(Xt ) = T Var(f(X)),
                                       T t=0

where X is a random variable also distributed according to π. More generally, however, correlation
between the samples makes finding an exact relationship difficult. Instead we look to find a bound
of the form                                   !
                                   1 T −1
                                                                  
                                                      1
                            Var      ∑ f(Xt ) ≤ h T Var(f(X)) ,
                                  T t=0
where h is some “well behaved” function.
    We first define a notion of mixing time for a Markov chain. The mixing time is a measure of
the forgetfulness of a Markov chain. More specifically, it is a measure of how long it takes for the
distance between the distributions of two sequences, starting in distinct states, to become small. The
distance measure we use is the total variation distance.

                                                 1480
                      VARIANCE R EDUCTION OF G RADIENT E STIMATES IN RL




Definition 2. The total variation distance between two distributions p, q on the finite set S is given
by
                                                def 1
                                     dTV (p, q) = ∑ |pi − qi |.
                                                    2 i∈S


Definition 3. The mixing time of a finite ergodic Markov chain M = (S , P) is defined as
                                                                 
                             def
                           τ = min t > 0 : max dTV Pti , Ptj ≤ e−1 ,
                                                            
                                                 i, j

where Pti denotes the ith row of the t-step transition matrix Pt .
    The results in this section are given for a Markov chain with mixing time τ. In later sections we
will use τ as a measure of the mixing time of the resultant Markov chain of states of a controlled
(PO)MDP, but will look at sample averages over larger spaces. The following lemma, due to Bartlett
and Baxter (2002), shows that the mixing time does not grow too fast when looking at the Markov
chain on sequences of states.
Lemma 1. (Bartlett and Baxter, 2002, Lemma 4.3) If the Markov chain M = (S , P) has mixing time
τ, then the Markov chain formed by the process {Xt , Xt+1 , . . . , Xt+k } has mixing time τ̃, where

                                          τ̃ ≤ τ ln (e(k + 1)) .



Note 1. For a controlled POMDP, the Markov chain formed by the process
{Xt , Xt+1 , . . . , Xt+k } has the same mixing time as the Markov chain formed by the process
{Xt ,Yt ,Ut , Xt+1 , . . . ,Yt+k−1 ,Ut+k−1 , Xt+k }.
   We now look at showing the relationship between the covariance between two samples in a
sequence and the variance of an individual sample. We show that the gain of the covariance of two
samples Xt , Xt+s over the variance of an individual sample decreases exponentially in s.
Theorem 2. Let M = (S , P) be a finite ergodic Markov chain, and let π be its stationary distribution.
Let f be some mapping f : S → R. The tuple (M, f) has associated positive constants α and L (called
mixing constants (α, L)) such that, for all t ≥ 0,

                                     |Covπ (t; f)| ≤ Lαt Var(f(X))

where X ∼ π, and Covπ (t; f) is the auto-covariance of the process {f(Xs )}, i.e. Covπ (t; f) =
Eπ [(f(Xs ) − Eπ f(Xs )) (f(Xs+t ) − Eπ f(Xs+t ))], where Eπ [·] denotes the expectation over the chain
with initial distribution π. Furthermore, if M has mixing time τ, we have:
   1. for reversible M, and any f, we may choose L = 2e and α = exp(−1/τ); and

   2. for any M (that is, any finite ergodic M), and any f, we may choose L = 2 |S | e and α =
                                                                             p

      exp(−1/(2τ)).
    The proof is shown in Appendix B, along with proofs for the rest of this section.
    Using this result, the variance of the sample average can be bounded as follows.

                                                  1481
                              G REENSMITH , BARTLETT AND BAXTER




Theorem 3. Let M = (S , P) be a finite ergodic Markov chain, with mixing time τ, and let π be its
stationary distribution. Let f be some mapping f : S → R. Let {Xt } be a sample path generated by
M, with initial distribution π, and let X ∼ π. With (M, f) mixing constants (α, L) chosen such that
α ≤ exp(−1/(2τ)), there is an Ω∗ ≤ 6Lτ such that
                                                    !
                                       1 T −1          Ω∗
                                 Var      ∑
                                       T t=0
                                              f(Xt ) ≤
                                                       T
                                                          Var(f(X)).



    Provided acceptable mixing constants can be chosen, Theorem 3 gives the same rate as in the
case of independent random variables, that is, the variance decreases as O(1/T ). The most that can
be done to improve the bound of Theorem 3 is to reduce the constant Ω∗ . It was seen, in Theorem 2,
that good mixing constants can be chosen for functions on reversible Markov chains. We would like
to deal with more general chains also, and the mixing constants given in Theorem 2 for functions on
ergodic Markov chains lead to Ω∗ increasing with the size of the state space. However, for bounded
functions on ergodic Markov chains we have the following result:

Theorem 4. Let M = (S , P) be a finite ergodic Markov chain, and let π be its stationary distribution.
If M has mixing time τ, then for any function f : S → [−c, c] and any 0 < ε < e−1 , we have
                                 !
                     1 T −1
                                                                     
                                                                     1 1
               Var      ∑ t
                     T t=0
                            f(X )  ≤  ε +   1 + 25τ(1 + c)ε +  4τ ln
                                                                     ε T
                                                                         Var (f(X)) ,


where {Xt } is a process generated by M with initial distribution X0 ∼ π, and X ∼ π.

   Here we have an additional error ε, which we may decrease at the cost of a ln ε−1 penalty in the
constant multiplying the variance term.
   Consider the following corollary of Theorem 4.

Corollary 5. Let M = (S , P) be a finite ergodic Markov chain, and let π be its stationary distribu-
tion. If M has mixing time τ, then for any function f : S → [−c, c], we have
                             !                                          −1 !
                1 T −1
                                                          
                                                        1 1                   1
          Var     ∑
                T t=0
                       f(Xt )   ≤ 4τ ln 7(1 + c) +
                                                       4τ T
                                                             Var (f(X))
                                                                              T
                                                                                Var (f(X))

                                                      1
                                         + (1 + 8τ)     Var (f(X))
                                                      T
where {Xt } is a process generated by M with initial distribution X0 ∼ π, and X ∼ π.

   Here, again, our bound approaches zero as Var(f(X))/T → 0, but at the slightly slower rate of
                                                            −1 !!
                            1                     1
                        O     Var(f(X)) ln e +      Var(f(X))         ,
                            T                     T

where we have ignored the dependence on τ and c. For a fixed variance the rate of decrease in T is
O(ln(T )/T ), slightly worse than the O(1/T ) rate for independent random variables.

                                                1482
                       VARIANCE R EDUCTION OF G RADIENT E STIMATES IN RL




5. Baseline Control Variate
As stated previously, a baseline may be selected with regard given only to the estimation variance.
In this section we consider how the baseline affects the variance of our gradient estimates when the
samples are iid, and the discounted value function is known. We show that, when using Theorem 3
or Theorem 4 to bound covariance terms, this is reasonable, and in fact the error in analysis (that is,
from not analyzing the variance of ∆T with baseline directly) associated with the choice of baseline
is negligible. This statement will be made more precise later.
    Section 5.2 looks at the Markov chain of states generated by the controlled POMDP and is
concerned with producing a baseline bS : S → R to minimize the variance

                                                ∇pi j
                                                                      
                              σS (bS ) = Varπ
                               2
                                                                     
                                                      J ( j) − bS (i) ,                            (8)
                                                 pi j β

 where, for some f : S × S → RK , Varπ (f(i, j)) = Eπ (f(i, j) − Eπ f(i, j))2 with Eπ [·] denoting the
expectation over the random variables i, j with i ∼ π and j ∼ Pi . Equation (8) serves as a definition
of σ2S (bS ). The section gives the minimal value of this variance, and the minimizing baseline. Addi-
tionally, the minimum variance and corresponding baseline is given for the case where the baseline
is a constant, b ∈ R. In both cases, we give expressions for the excess variance of a suboptimal
baseline, in terms of a weighted squared distance between the baseline and the optimal one. We can
thus show the difference between the variance for the optimal constant baseline and the variance
obtained when b = Eπ Jβ (i).
    Section 5.3 considers a baseline bY : Y → R for the GPOMDP estimates. It shows how to
minimize the variance of the estimate

                                                 ∇µu (y)
                                                                          
                              σ2Y (bY ) = Varπ
                                                                          
                                                          Jβ ( j) − bY (y) ,                       (9)
                                                  µu (y)

where, for some f : S × Y × U × S → RK , Varπ (f(i, y, u, j)) = Eπ (f(i, y, u, j) − Eπ f(i, y, u, j))2 with,
in this case, Eπ [·] denoting the expectation over the random variables i, y, u, j with i ∼ π, y ∼ ν(i),
u ∼ µ(y), and j ∼ Pi (u). Equation (9) serves as a definition of σ2Y (bY ). The case where the state
space is fully observed is shown as a consequence.

5.1 Matching Analysis and Algorithm
The analysis in following sections will look at Equation (8) and Equation (9). Here we will show
that the results of that analysis can be applied to the variance of a realizable algorithm for generating
∇β η estimates. Specifically, we compare the variance quantity of Equation (9) to a slight variation
of the ∆T estimate produced by GPOMDP, where the chain is run for an extra S steps. We consider
the estimate
                         (+S) def 1
                                    T −1
                                         ∇µUt (Yt ) (+S)               T +S
                                    ∑                              = ∑ βs−t r(Xs ),
                                                              (+S) def
                       ∆T =                        Jt+1 ,    Jt                                      (10)
                                  T t=0 µUt (Yt )                      s=t

and are interested in improving the variance by use of a baseline, that is, by using the estimate

                                         def 1      ∇µUt (Yt )  (+S)
                                                 T −1
                                                ∑ µU (Yt ) t+1 Y t .
                                                                              
                             (+S)
                           ∆T       (bY ) =                     J     − b (Y )
                                              T t=0   t



                                                        1483
                                   G REENSMITH , BARTLETT AND BAXTER




   We delay the main result of the section, Theorem 7, to gain an insight into the ideas behind it. In
                                                                                   (est)
Section 3.4 we saw how GPOMDP can be thought of as similar to the estimate ∆T , Equation (6).
Using a baseline gives us the new estimate

                                            def 1      ∇µUt (Yt )  (est)
                                                    T −1
                                                   ∑ µU (Yt ) t+1 Y t .
                                                                                  
                               (est)
                              ∆T       (bY ) =                     J      − b (Y )                          (11)
                                                 T t=0   t


            (est)
The term Jt     in Equation (11) is an unbiased estimate of the discounted value function. The
following lemma shows that, in analysis of the baseline, we can consider the discounted value
function to be known, not estimated.

Lemma 6. Let {Xt } be a random process over the space X . Define arbitrary functions on the
space X : f : X → R, J : X → R, and a : X → R. For all t let Jt be a random variable such that
E [ Jt | Xt = i] = J(i). Then
                                          !                                   !
                  1 T −1                         1 T −1
              Var   ∑ f(Xt ) (Jt − a(Xt )) − Var T ∑ f(Xt ) (J(Xt ) − a(Xt ))
                  T t=0                            t=0
                                                                             !2
                                                    1 T −1
                                              =E       ∑ f(Xt ) (Jt − J(Xt ))
                                                   T t=0



    The proof of Lemma 6 is given in Appendix C, along with the proof of Theorem 7 below.
    Direct application of Lemma 6 gives,
                                                                                          !
                                             1 T −1 ∇µUt (Yt )
                                               ∑
                              
                         (est)
                        ∆T (bY )
                                                                                    
             Var                       = Var                   Jβ (Xt+1 ) − bY (Yt )
                                             T t=0 µUt (Yt )
                                                                                                   !2
                                                           1 T −1 ∇µUt (Yt )  (est)
                                                             ∑
                                                                                               
                                                    +E                        Jt+1 − Jβ (Xt+1 )         .
                                                           T t=0 µUt (Yt )

Thus, we see that we can split the variance of this estimate into two components: the first is the
                                 (est)
variance of this estimate with Jt      replaced by the true discounted value function; and the second
is a component independent of our choice of baseline. We can now use Theorem 3 or Corollary 5
to bound the covariance terms, leaving us to analyze Equation (9).
     We can obtain the same sort of result, using the same reasoning, for the estimate we are inter-
                                (+S)
ested in studying in practice: ∆T (bY ) (see Equation (12) below).

Theorem 7. Let D = (S , U , Y , P, ν, r, µ) be a controlled POMDP satisfying Assumptions 1, 2 and 3.
Let M = (S , P) be the resultant Markov chain of states, and let π be its stationary distribution; M
has a mixing time τ; {Zt } = {Xt ,Yt ,Ut , Xt+1 } is a process generated by D, starting X0 ∼ π. Suppose
that a(·) is a function uniformly bounded by M, and J ( j) is the random variable ∑∞   s=0 β r(Ws ) where
                                                                                            s

the states Ws are generated by D starting in W0 = j. There are constants C1 ≤ 7 + 7B(R + M) and

                                                           1484
                       VARIANCE R EDUCTION OF G RADIENT E STIMATES IN RL




C2 = 20τB2 R(R + M) such that for all T, S ≥ 1 we have
                                                !
             1 T −1 ∇µUt (Yt )  (+S)
               ∑ µU (Yt ) Jt+1 − a(Zt )
                                              
         Var
             T t=0     t

                 τ ln(e(S + 1))         ∇µu (y)
                                                                       
                                                                        
           ≤ h                   Varπ            J ( j) − a(i, y, u, j)
                        T                µu (y) β
                                                                           !
                          τ ln(e(S + 1))       ∇µu (y)                   2
                                             
                    +h                   Eπ             J ( j) − Jβ ( j)
                                 T              µu (y)
                                                       K(1 − β)2
                                                                 
                         2C2        1          C1                        (T + S) ln(e(S + 1)) S
                    +             ln + ln            +                                       β ,
                      (1 − β)  2    β         1−β          C2                     T

where h : R+ → R+ is continuous and increasing with h(0) = 0, and is given by
                                                            
                                                    C1  K −1
                                 h(x) = 9x + 4x ln     + x     .
                                                   1−β 4

                                                             (+S)
    By selecting S = T in Theorem 7, and applying to ∆T (bY ) with absolutely bounded bY , we
obtain the desired result:

                                  τ ln(e(T + 1)) 2
                                                     
                   (+T )
            Var ∆T (bY ) ≤ h                    σY (bY ) + N(D, T ) + O ln(T )βT .
                                                                                
                                                                                         (12)
                                         T

Here N(D, T ) is the noise term due to using an estimate in place of the discounted value function,
and does not depend on the choice of baseline. The remaining term is of the order ln(T )βT ; it is
almost exponentially decreasing in T, and hence negligible. The function h is due to the application
of Theorem 4, and consequently the discussion in Section 4 on the rate of decrease applies here,
that is, a log penalty is paid. In this case, for σ2Y (bY ) fixed, the rate of decrease is O(ln2 (T )/T ).
    Note that we may replace (∇µu (y))/µu (y) with (∇pi j )/pi j in Theorem 7. So if the (∇pi j )/pi j
can be calculated, then Theorem 7 also relates the analysis of Equation 8 with a realizable algorithm
for generating ∇β η estimates; in this case an estimate produced by watching the Markov process of
states.

5.2 Markov Chains
Here we look at baselines for ∇β η estimates for a parameterized Markov chain and associated
reward function (a Markov reward process). The Markov chain of states generated by a controlled
POMDP (together with the POMDPs reward function) is an example of such a process. However,
the baselines discussed in this section require knowledge of the state to use, and knowledge of
(∇pi j (θ))/pi j (θ) to estimate. More practical results for POMDPs are given in the next section.
    Consider the following assumption.

Assumption 4. The parameterized Markov chain M(θ) = (S , P(θ)) and associated reward function
r : S → R satisfy: M(θ) is irreducible and aperiodic, with stationary distribution π; there is a R < ∞
such that for all i ∈ S we have |r(i)| ≤ R; and for all i, j ∈ S , and all θ ∈ RK , the partial derivatives
∇pi j (θ) exist, and there is a B < ∞ such that k(∇pi j (θ))/pi j (θ)k ≤ B.

                                                   1485
                                G REENSMITH , BARTLETT AND BAXTER




   For any controlled POMDP satisfying Assumptions 1, 2 and 3, Assumption 4 is satisfied for the
Markov chain formed by the subprocess {Xt } together with the reward function for the controlled
POMDP.
   Now consider a control variate of the form
                                                     def
                                            ϕS (i, j) = πi ∇pi j bS (i)

for estimation of the integral in Equation (3). We refer to the function bS : S → R as a baseline.
    As shown in Section 3.5, the integral of the baseline control variate ϕS (i, j) over S × S can be
calculated analytically and is equal to zero. Thus an estimate of the integral
                            Z
                                            πi ∇pi j Jβ ( j) − ϕS (i, j) C(di×d j)
                                                                        
                             (i, j)∈S ×S

forms an unbiased estimate of ∇β η.
    The following theorem gives the minimum variance, and the baseline to achieve the minimum
variance. We use σ2S to denote the variance of the estimate without a baseline,

                                                             ∇pi j
                                                                        
                                           σS = Varπ
                                            2
                                                                   J ( j) ,
                                                              pi j β

and we recall, from Equation (8), that σ2S (bS ) denotes the variance with a baseline,

                                                       ∇pi j
                                                                             
                                σS (bS ) = Varπ
                                 2
                                                                            
                                                             J ( j) − bS (i) .
                                                        pi j β

Theorem 8. Let M(θ) = (S , P(θ)) and r : S → R be a parameterized Markov chain and reward
function satisfying Assumption 4. Then
                                                         h                           i2 
                                                                         2
                           def
                                                          E  (∇pij /pij )  J β ( j)  i
                σ2S (b∗S ) = inf σ2S (bS ) = σ2S − Ei∼π                                   ,
                                                             h                    i       
                               bS ∈RS                                         2
                                                             E (∇pi j /pi j ) i

where E [ ·| i] is the expectation over the resultant state j conditioned on being in state i, that is,
j ∼ Pi , and RS is the space of functions mapping S to R. This infimum is attained with the baseline
                                              h                          i
                                             E (∇pi j /pi j )2 Jβ ( j) i
                                   b∗S (i) =    h                    i .
                                               E (∇pi j /pi j )2 i


    The proof uses the following lemma.

Lemma 9. For any bS ,
                                "           "           2 #            "                  ##
                                                 ∇pi j                      ∇pi j 2
                                                                                  
           σ2S (bS ) = σ2S + Eπ b2S (i) E                   i − 2bS (i)E            Jβ ( j) i .
                                                  pi j                       pi j


                                                       1486
                       VARIANCE R EDUCTION OF G RADIENT E STIMATES IN RL




Proof.
                        ∇pi j                                      ∇pi j                     2
                                                                                           
    σS (bS ) =
      2
                                                   
                   Eπ            J ( j) − bS (i) − Eπ                      J ( j) − bS (i)
                          pi j β                                    pi j β
                           ∇pi j                   ∇pi j                      ∇pi j                 ∇pi j
                                                                                                         2
              =    Eπ             Jβ ( j) − Eπ               Jβ ( j) −                bS (i) − Eπ         bS (i)
                            pi j                    pi j                        pi j                 pi j
                             "                                              0                 #
                                  ∇pi j                        ∇pi j                 ∇pi j
                                               2           
              =    σ2S + Eπ              bS (i) − 2                    bS (i)              J ( j)                    (13)
                                   pi j                           pi j                pi j β
                                "          "                          #
                                                 ∇p
                                                           2
                                                       ı̃˜
              =    σ2S + Ei∼π b2S (i) E                         ı̃ = i
                                                   pı̃˜
                                        "                               ##
                                             ∇pı̃˜ 2
                                                   
                         − 2bS (i)E                        Jβ (˜) ı̃ = i ,
                                              pı̃˜

where Equation (13) uses
                         ∇pi j
                                     Z
                    Eπ         bS (i) =             πi ∇pi j bS (i)C(di×d j) = 0,
                          pi j          (i, j)∈S ×S

from (7).

Proof of Theorem 8. We use Lemma 9 and minimize for each i ∈ S . Differentiating with respect to
each bS (i) gives
                   "        #      "                  #
                      ∇pi j 2           ∇pi j 2
                                              
          2bS (i)E            i − 2E            Jβ ( j) i = 0
                       pi j              pi j
                                                              h                        i
                                                                            2
                                                            E (∇pi j /pi j ) Jβ ( j) i
                                                ⇒ bS (i) =        h                 i ,
                                                                E (∇pi j /pi j )2 i

which implies the result.

    The following theorem shows that the excess variance due to a suboptimal baseline function can
be expressed as a weighted squared distance to the optimal baseline.
Theorem 10. Let M(θ) = (S , P(θ)) and r : S → R be a parameterized Markov chain and reward
function satisfying Assumption 4. Then
                                                   "                               #
                                                      ∇p
                                                              2
                                                          i j                     2
                       σ2S (bS ) − σ2S (b∗S ) = Eπ               bS (i) − b∗S (i)
                                                                                 
                                                                                      .
                                                       pi j

Proof. For each i ∈ S , define Si and Wi as
                                                   "           2 #
                                                        ∇pi j
                                      Si = E                       i ,
                                                         pi j
                                                   "                        #
                                                        ∇pi j
                                                                2
                                     Wi = E                          Jβ ( j) i .
                                                         pi j

                                                       1487
                                G REENSMITH , BARTLETT AND BAXTER




Lemma 9 and the definition of b∗S in Theorem 8 imply that

                                                                                     Wi2
                                                                                        
                     σS (bS ) − σS (bS ) =
                       2            2     ∗                 2
                                                       Eπ bS (i) Si − 2bS (i)Wi +
                                                                                     Si
                                                                               2
                                                                   p      Wi
                                                  =    Eπ bS (i) Si − √
                                                                            Si
                                                          h                     i
                                                                            2
                                                       Eπ bS (i) − b∗S (i) Si
                                                                          
                                                  =
                                                          "                               #
                                                              ∇pi j 2
                                                                    
                                                                                   ∗
                                                                                        2
                                                  =    Eπ              bS (i) − bS (i)       .
                                                               pi j

    The following theorem gives the minimum variance, the baseline to achieve the minimum vari-
ance, and the additional variance away from this minimum, when restricted to a constant baseline,
b ∈ R. We use σ2S (b) to denote the variance with constant baseline b,

                                                 ∇pi j
                                                                 
                                 σS (b) = Varπ
                                  2
                                                                 
                                                       J ( j) − b .                         (14)
                                                  pi j β

The proof uses Lemma 9 in the same way as the proof of Theorem 8. The proof of the last statement
follows that of Theorem 10 by replacing Si with S = Eπ Si , and Wi with W = EπWi .

Theorem 11. Let M(θ) = (S , P(θ)) and r : S → R be a parameterized Markov chain and reward
function satisfying Assumption 4. Then
                                                                  h                       i2
                              def
                                                                 Eπ (∇pi j /pi j )2 Jβ ( j)
                      σ2S (b∗ ) = inf σ2S (b) = σ2S −                                            .
                                    b∈R                               Eπ (∇pi j /pi j )2

This infimum is attained with                       h                       i
                                                  Eπ (∇pi j /pi j )2 Jβ ( j)
                                        b∗ =                                      .
                                                       Eπ (∇pi j /pi j )2
The excess variance due to a suboptimal constant baseline b is given by,

                                                                  ∇pi j
                                                                         2
                              σS (b) − σS (b ) = Eπ
                                2             2    ∗
                                                                               (b − b∗ )2 .
                                                                   pi j


    A baseline of the form b = Eπ Jβ (i) is often promoted as a good choice. Theorem 11 gives us a
tool to measure how far this choice is from the optimum.

Corollary 12. Let M(θ) = (S , P(θ)) and r : S → R be a Markov chain and reward function satisfy-
ing Assumption 4. Then
                                                                             h                       i2
                                            Eπ (∇pi j /pi j )2 Eπ Jβ ( j) − Eπ (∇pi j /pi j )2 Jβ ( j)
          σ2S (EJβ (i)) − σ2S (b∗ ) =                                                                       .
                                                                   Eπ (∇pi j /pi j )2


                                                          1488
                        VARIANCE R EDUCTION OF G RADIENT E STIMATES IN RL




    Notice that the sub-optimality of the choice b = Eπ Jβ (i) depends on the independence of the
random variables (∇pi j /pi j )2 and Jβ ( j); if they are nearly independent, Eπ Jβ (i) is a good choice.
    Of course, when considering sample paths of Markov chains, Corollary 12 only shows the
difference of the two bounds on the variance given by Theorem 7, but it gives an indication of the
true distance. In particular, as the ratio of the mixing time to the sample path length becomes small,
the difference between the variances in the dependent case approaches that of Corollary 12.

5.3 POMDPs
Consider a control variate over the extended space S × Y × U × S of the form

                                    ϕ(i, y, u, j) = πi νy (i)∇µu (y)pi j (u)b(i, y).

Again, its integral is zero.
                           Z
                                                     ϕ(i, y, u, j)C(di×dy×du×d j)
                             (i,y,u, j)∈S ×Y ×U ×S
                                                                                          !
                               =       ∑ πi νy (i)b(i, y)∇          ∑        µu (y)pi j (u)   = 0.
                                    i∈S ,y∈Y                     u∈U , j∈S

Thus an unbiased estimate of the integral
           Z
                                    πi νy (i)∇µu (y)pi j (u)Jβ ( j) − ϕ(i, y, u, j) C(di×dy×du×d j)
                                                                                   
            (i,y,u, j)∈S ×Y ×U ×S

is an unbiased estimate of ∇β η. Here results analogous to those achieved for ϕS (i, j) can be ob-
tained. However, we focus on the more interesting (and practical) case of the restricted control
variate
                                            def
                            ϕY (i, y, u, j) = πi νy (i)∇µu (y)pi j (u)bY (y).
Here, only information that can be observed by the controller (the observations y) may be used to
minimize the variance. Recall, from Equation (9), we use σ2Y (bY ) to denote the variance with such
a restricted baseline control variate,
                                               ∇µu (y)
                                                                      
                             σY (bY ) = Varπ
                               2
                                                                      
                                                       J ( j) − bY (y) .
                                                µu (y) β

We use σ2Y to denote the variance without a baseline, that is

                                                ∇µu (y)
                                                             
                                   σY = Varπ
                                    2
                                                        J ( j) .
                                                 µu (y) β
We have the following theorem.
Theorem 13. Let D = (S , U , Y , P, ν, r, µ) be a controlled POMDP satisfying Assumptions 1, 2
and 3, with stationary distribution π. Then
                                                  h                               i2 
                                                                          2
                      def                         Eπ (∇µ    u (y)/µu (y)) Jβ ( j) y
           σ2Y (b∗Y ) = inf σ2Y (bY ) = σ2Y − Eπ                                       ,
                                                           h                      i     
                          bY ∈R Y                                            2
                                                        Eπ (∇µu (y)/µu (y)) y


                                                         1489
                                          G REENSMITH , BARTLETT AND BAXTER




where Eπ [ ·| y] is the expectation (of π-distributed random variables, that is, random variables dis-
tributed as in Eπ [·]) conditioned on observing y, and this infimum is attained with the baseline
                                                    h                           i
                                                  Eπ (∇µu (y)/µu (y))2 Jβ ( j) y
                                        b∗Y (y) =     h                      i .
                                                    Eπ (∇µu (y)/µu (y))2 y

Furthermore, when restricted to the class of constant baselines, b ∈ R, the minimal variance occurs
with                                     h                        i
                                      Eπ (∇µu (y)/µu (y))2 Jβ ( j)
                               b∗ =                                 .
                                          Eπ (∇µu (y)/µu (y))2

    We have again used b∗ to denote the optimal constant baseline. Note though that the b∗ here
differs from that given in Theorem 11. The proof uses the following lemma.

Lemma 14. For any bY ,
                                "                 "                2 #             "                    ##
                                                       ∇µu (y)                          ∇µu (y) 2
                                                                                                
      σ2Y (bY ) = σ2Y + Eπ b2Y (y) Eπ                                  y − 2bY (y)Eπ              Jβ ( j) y .
                                                       µu (y)                            µu (y)

Proof. Following the same steps as in the proof of Lemma 9,

                      ∇µu (y)                          ∇µu (y)                      2
                                                                                  
       σY (bY ) = Eπ
         2
                                                
                                J ( j) − bY (y) − Eπ              J ( j) − bY (y)
                       µu (y) β                         µu (y) β
                           "                                         0                  #
                               ∇µu (y)                ∇µu (y)               ∇µu (y)
                                               2   
                = σY + Eπ
                   2
                                         bY (y) − 2           bY (y)                 J ( j)
                                µu (y)                 µu (y)                 µu (y) β
                          "                                              !
                                                              ∇µu (y) 2
                                                            
                = σY + ∑ bY (y) ∑ πi νy (i)µu (y)pi j (u)
                   2         2
                        y             i,u, j                   µu (y)
                                                                                 !#
                                                             ∇µu (y) 2
                                                                     
                      −2bY (y) ∑ πi νy (i)µu (y)pi j (u)                  Jβ ( j) .
                                    i,u, j                    µu (y)

Note that for functions a : Y → R and f : S × Y × U × S → R

                       ∑ a(y) ∑ πı̃ νy (ı̃)µũ (y)pı̃˜(ũ)f(ı̃, y, ũ, ˜)
                        y           ı̃,ũ,˜
                                                                         δyỹ πı̃ νy (ı̃)µũ (y)pı̃˜(ũ)
                            =   ∑ a(y) ∑ πi νy (i) ∑                              ∑i πi νy (i)
                                                                                                         f(ı̃, ỹ, ũ, ˜)
                                    y         i               ı̃,ỹ,ũ,˜

                            =   ∑ πi νy (i)a(y) ∑ Pr {ı̃, ỹ, ũ, ˜|ỹ = y} f(ı̃, ỹ, ũ, ˜)
                                 i,y                   ı̃,ỹ,ũ,˜
                            = Eπ [a(y)Eπ [ f(i, y, u, j)| y]] ,

implying the result.

                                                                    1490
                      VARIANCE R EDUCTION OF G RADIENT E STIMATES IN RL




Proof of Theorem 13. We apply Lemma 14 and minimize for each bY (y) independently, to obtain
                                     h                           i
                                   Eπ (∇µu (y)/µu (y))2 Jβ ( j) y
                          bY (y) =     h                      i .
                                     Eπ (∇µu (y)/µu (y))2 y

Substituting gives the optimal variance. A similar argument gives the optimal constant baseline.

Example 1. Consider the k-armed bandit problem (for example, see Sutton and Barto, 1998). Here
each action is taken independently and the resultant state depends only on the action performed;
                                                                         ∞
that is µu (y) = µu and pi j (u) = p j (u). So, writing Rβ = EU0 ∼µ [∑t=1    βt r(Xt )] , we have
                                                      ∇µu (y)
                                                                    
                                   ∇β η = Eπ                  Jβ ( j)
                                                      µu (y)
                                                        ∇µu
                                                                          
                                                                          
                                            = Eu∼µ             r( j) + Rβ
                                                         µu
                                                        ∇µu
                                                                 
                                            = Eu∼µ           r( j) .
                                                         µu
Note that this last line is β independent, and it follows from limβ→1 ∇β η = ∇η that
                                      ∇η = ∇β η            ∀β ∈ [0, 1].                            (15)
For k = 2 (2 actions {u1 , u2 }) we have µu1 + µu2 = 1 and ∇µu1 = −∇µu2 , and so the optimal constant
baseline is given by
                                h                       i
                            Eπ (∇µu (y)/µu (y))2 Jβ ( j)
                  b∗ =
                                 Eπ (∇µu (y)/µu (y))2
                                  h                i
                            Eu∼µ (∇µu /µu )2 r( j)
                      =                              + Rβ
                                 Eu∼µ (∇µu /µu )2
                           µu1 (∇µu1 /µu1 )2 E [ r| u1 ] + µu2 (∇µu2 /µu2 )2 E [ r| u2 ]
                      =                                                                    + Rβ
                                   µu1 (∇µu1 /µu1 )2 + µu2 (∇µu2 /µu2 )2
                                                                         
                         µu1 µu2         1                  1
                      =                    E [ r| u1 ] +       E [ r| u2 ] + Rβ
                        µu1 + µu2 µu1                      µu2
                      = µu2 E [ r| u1 ] + µu1 E [ r| u2 ] + Rβ ,
where we have used E [ r| u] to denote E j∼p(u) r( j). From (15) we know that β may be chosen arbi-
trarily. Choosing β = 0 gives Rβ = 0 and we regain the result of Dayan (1990).
    In the special case of a controlled MDP we obtain the result that would be expected. This
follows immediately from Theorem 13.
Corollary 15. Let D = (S , U , P, r, µ) be a controlled MDP satisfying Assumptions 1, 2 and 3, with
stationary distribution π. Then
                                                h                               i2 
                                                                       2
                                                E (∇µ    u (i)/µu (i)) Jβ ( j) i
                    inf σ2Y (bY ) = σ2Y − Ei∼π                                       ,
                                                        h                      i      
                  bY ∈R S                                                 2
                                                      E (∇µu (i)/µu (i)) i


                                                    1491
                               G REENSMITH , BARTLETT AND BAXTER




and this infimum is attained with the baseline
                                          h                           i
                                        E (∇µu (i)/µu (i))2 Jβ ( j) i
                               bY (i) =      h                    i .
                                           E (∇µu (i)/µu (i))2 i

    The following theorem shows that, just as in the Markov chain case, the variance of an estimate
with an arbitrary baseline can be expressed as the sum of the variance with the optimal baseline and
a certain squared weighted distance between the baseline function and the optimal baseline function.
Theorem 16. Let (S , U , Y , P, ν, r, µ) be a controlled POMDP satisfying Assumptions 1, 2 and 3,
with stationary distribution π. Then
                                                "                                  #
                                                   ∇µ
                                                            2 
                                                      u (y)                      2
                    σ2Y (bY ) − σ2Y (b∗Y ) = Eπ                  bY (y) − b∗Y (y)     .
                                                    µu (y)

    Furthermore if the estimate using b∗ , the optimal constant baseline defined in Theorem 13,
has variance σ2Y (b∗ ), we have that the variance σ2Y (b) of the gradient estimate with an arbitrary
constant baseline is
                                                       ∇µu (y) 2
                                                             
                            σ2Y (b) − σ2Y (b∗ ) = Eπ             (b − b∗ )2 .
                                                       µu (y)
Proof. For each y ∈ Y , define Sy and Wy as
                                           "               2 #
                                                  ∇µu (y)
                                 Sy = E                        y ,
                                                  µu (y)
                                             "                          #
                                                  ∇µu (y)
                                                            2
                                 Wy = E                          Jβ ( j) y .
                                                  µu (y)

Follow the steps in Theorem 10, replacing Si with Sy , and Wi with Wy . The constant baseline case
follows similarly by considering S = Eπ Sy and W = EπWy .

    In Section 7.1 we will see how Theorem 16 can be used to construct a practical algorithm for
finding a good baseline. In most cases it is not possible to calculate the optimal baseline, b∗Y , a
priori. However, for a parameterized class of baseline functions, a gradient descent approach could
be used to find a good baseline. Section 7.1 explores this idea.
    As before, Theorem 16 also gives us a tool to measure how far the baseline b = Eπ Jβ (i) is from
the optimum.
Corollary 17. Let D = (S , U , Y , P, ν, r, µ) be a controlled POMDP satisfying Assumptions 1, 2
and 3, with stationary distribution π. Then
                                                                        h                         i2
                                     Eπ (∇µu (y)/µu (y))2 Eπ Jβ ( j) − Eπ (∇µu (y)/µu (y))2 Jβ ( j)
   σ2Y (Eπ Jβ (i)) − inf σ2Y (b) =                                                                     .
                     b∈R                                 Eπ (∇µu (y)/µu (y))2
    As in the case of a Markov reward process, the sub-optimality of the choice b = Eπ Jβ (i) de-
pends on the independence of the random variables (∇µu (y)/µu (y))2 and Jβ ( j); if they are nearly
independent, Eπ Jβ (i) is a good choice.

                                                  1492
                              VARIANCE R EDUCTION OF G RADIENT E STIMATES IN RL




6. Value Functions: Actor-Critic Methods
Consider the estimate produced by GPOMDP (see Equation (5)) in the MDP setting, where the state
is observed. In this section we look at replacing Jt , the biased and noisy estimate of the discounted
value function, in ∆T with an arbitrary value function, that is, a function V : S → R. For a MDP,
this gives the following estimate of ∇β η:
                                                            T −1 ∇µ (X )
                                                    def 1
                                              ∆V
                                               T =       ∑ µU (Xt )
                                                       T t=0
                                                                   Ut t
                                                                             V(Xt+1 ).                                     (16)
                                                             t



    Imagine that the discounted value function, Jβ , is known. By replacing Jt with Jβ (Xt ) in Equa-
tion (5), that is, by choosing V = Jβ , the bias and noise due to Jt is removed. This seems a good
choice, but we may be able to do better. Indeed we will see that in some cases the selection of
a value function differing from the discounted value function can remove all estimation variance,
whilst introducing no bias.

6.1 Control Variate for a Value Function
Consider a control variate of the form
                                                            def
                                             ϕβ (i, u, j) = πi ∇µu (i)pi j (u)Aβ ( j)

where                                                 "                                             #
                                                           T
                                                          ∑ βk−1 d(Xt+k , Xt+1+k ) Xt+1 = j
                                       def
                               Aβ ( j) = lim E
                                             T →∞
                                                          k=1

and
                                                          def
                                               d(i, j) = r(i) + βV( j) − V(i).
We make the following assumption.
Assumption 5. For all j ∈ S , |V( j)| ≤ M < ∞.
      Under this assumption, the estimation of the integral
                      Z
                                             πi ∇µu (i)pi j (u)Jβ ( j) − ϕβ (i, u, j) C(di×du×d j)
                                                                                     
                                                                                                                           (17)
                       (i,u, j)∈S ×U ×S

has an expected bias from ∇β η of
         Z
                              ϕβ (i, u, j)C(di×du×d j) =                 ∑          πi ∇µu (i)pi j (u) Jβ ( j) − V( j) .
                                                                                                                      
           (i,u, j)∈S ×U ×S                                        i∈S ,u∈U , j∈S

This can be easily seen by noting that under Assumption 5, and as β ∈ [0, 1),
                               "                                                                                 #
                                             T
              Aβ ( j) =         lim E
                                T →∞
                                             ∑β     k−1
                                                          (r(Xt+k ) + βV(Xt+1+k ) − V(Xt+k )) Xt+1 = j
                                             k=1

                          = Jβ ( j) − V( j) + lim E βT V(Xt+1+T ) Xt+1 = j
                                                                          
                                                      T →∞
                          = Jβ ( j) − V( j).

                                                                  1493
                                            G REENSMITH , BARTLETT AND BAXTER




    We see then that ∆VT gives an estimate of the integral in Equation (17). The following theorem
gives a bound on the expected value of the squared Euclidean distance between this estimate and
∇β η. Notice that the bound includes both bias and variance terms.

Theorem 18. Let D = (S , U , P, r, µ) be a controlled MDP satisfying Assumptions 1, 2 and 3, with
stationary distribution π. Let {Xt ,Ut } be a process generated by D, starting X0 ∼ π. Then
                                                                  !  
                                             1 T −1 ∇µUt (Xt )          ∇µu (i)
                                  2                                                  2
                                               ∑ µU (Xt ) V(Xt+1 ) + Eπ µu (i) Aβ ( j) ,
                 
             E        T − ∇β η
                     ∆V                = Var
                                             T t=0    t



and hence there is an Ω∗ such that

                                                Ω∗        ∇µu (i)            ∇µu (i)
                                        2                                            2
                     E        T − ∇β η
                             ∆V               ≤    Varπ           V( j) + Eπ         A ( j)    .
                                                T          µu (i)             µu (i) β


Proof.
                2
     E ∆V
        T − ∇β η
                                                                       !2
                  1 T −1 ∇µUt (Xt )              ∇µu (i)
                                               
                    ∑ µU (Xt ) V(Xt+1 ) − Eπ µu (i) V( j) + Aβ ( j)
                                                                      
         =   E
                 T t=0       t

                                                              !2
                  1 T −1 ∇µUt (Xt )              ∇µu (i)
                                               
         =   E      ∑ µU (Xt ) V(Xt+1 ) − Eπ µu (i) V( j)
                 T t=0       t
                                       0   "                                         #!
                         ∇µu (i)               1 T −1 ∇µUt (Xt )             ∇µu (i)
                                                                         
             − 2 Eπ              A ( j)
                          µu (i) β
                                           E      ∑ µU (Xt ) V(Xt+1 ) − Eπ µu (i) V( j)
                                               T t=0     t


                      ∇µu (i)
                                   2
             + E               A ( j)                                                      (18)
                       µu (i) β
                                           !  
                   1 T −1 ∇µUt (Xt )                   ∇µu (i)
                                                                   2
         =   Var       ∑ µU (Xt ) V(Xt+1 ) + Eπ µu (i) Aβ ( j)
                   T t=0       t


             Ω∗         ∇µu (i)                ∇µu (i)
                                                         2
         ≤       Varπ            V( j) + Eπ            A ( j)    .                         (19)
              T          µu (i)                 µu (i) β

Note that                                                    "                      #
                                           ∇µu (i)             1 T −1 ∇µUt (Xt )
                                                       
                                  Eπ
                                            µu (i)
                                                   V( j) = E     ∑ µU (Xt ) V(Xt+1 ) ,
                                                               T t=0    t


which means that the second term of Equation (18) is zero, and the first term becomes the variance
of the estimate. Equation (19), and hence Theorem 18, follow from Theorem 3.

Corollary 19. Let D = (S , U , P, r, µ) be a controlled MDP satisfying Assumptions 1, 2 and 3. Let
M = (S , P) be the resultant chain of states, and let π be its stationary distribution; M has mixing

                                                             1494
                          VARIANCE R EDUCTION OF G RADIENT E STIMATES IN RL




time τ. Let {Xt ,Ut } be a process generated by D, starting X0 ∼ π. Then for any 0 < ε < e−1 there is
a Cε ≤ 1 + 50τ(1 + M) + 8τ ln ε−1 such that

                                                    ∇µu (i)            ∇µu (i)
                                 2                                              2
                                           Cε
             E        T − ∇β η
                     ∆V               ≤ Kε + Varπ           V( j) + Eπ         A ( j)    .
                                            T        µu (i)             µu (i) β



Proof. Apply Theorem 4 to the first part of Theorem 18, for each of the K dimensions, noting that
the mixing time of the process {Xt ,Ut , Xt+1 } is at most τ ln(2e) ≤ 2τ (Lemma 1).

6.2 Zero Variance, Zero Bias Example
Write v = V − Jβ . The bias due to using V in place of Jβ is given by

                                                           Gv,

where G is a K × |S | matrix with its jth column given by ∑i∈S ,u∈U πi ∇µu (i)pi j (u). If v is in the right
null space of G then this bias is zero. An example of such a v is a constant vector; v = (c, c, . . . , c)0 .
This can be used to construct a trivial example of how ∆V T (Equation (16)) can produce an unbiased,
zero variance estimate. The observation that we need only consider value functions that span the
range space of G to produce a “good” gradient estimate, in the sense that convergence results may
be obtained, was made by Konda and Tsitsiklis (2003, 2000); Sutton et al. (2000). Here we wish
to consider a richer class of value functions for the purpose of actively reducing the variance of
gradient estimates.
    Consider a controlled MDP D = (S , U , P, r, µ) satisfying Assumptions 1, 2 and 3, and with
r(i) = (1 − β)c, for some constant c, and all i ∈ S . This gives a value function of Jβ (i) = c, for all
i ∈ S , and consequently

                                  ∇β η = ∑ πi ∇µu (i)c = c ∑ πi ∇ ∑ µu (i) = 0.
                                           i,u                   i         u


With v = (−c, −c, . . . , −c)0 , and selecting the fixed value function V = Jβ + v, we have

                                           ∇µu (i)
                                                   V( j) = 0,        ∀i, u, j.
                                           µu (i)

So ∆V T will produce a zero bias, zero variance estimate of ∇β η. Note also that if the MDP is such
that there exists an i, u pair such that Pr{Xt = i,Ut = u} > 0 and ∇µu (i) 6= 0 then selecting V = Jβ
gives an estimate that, whilst still unbiased, has non-zero variance. The event

                                                     ∇µu (i)
                                                                      
                                                             V( j) 6= 0
                                                      µu (i)

has a non-zero probability of occurrence.
    A less trivial example is given in Appendix D.

                                                          1495
                               G REENSMITH , BARTLETT AND BAXTER




7. Algorithms
In Section 5 and Section 6 we have seen bounds on squared error of gradient estimates when using
various additive control variates. For the baseline control variates we have also seen the choice of
baseline which minimizes this bound. Though it may not be possible to select the best baseline or
value function a priori, data could be used to help us choose. For a parameterized baseline, or value
function, we could improve the error bounds via gradient decent. In this section we explore this
idea.

7.1 Minimizing Weighted Squared Distance to the Optimal Baseline
Given a controlled POMDP and a parameterized class of baseline functions
                                bY (·, ω) : Y → R ω ∈ RL ,
                               

we wish to choose a baseline function to minimize the variance of our gradient estimates. Theo-
rem 16 expresses this variance as the sum of the optimal variance and a squared distance between
the baseline function and the optimal one. It follows that we can minimize the variance of our gra-
dient estimates by minimizing the distance between our baseline and the optimum baseline. The
next theorem shows that we can use a sample path of the controlled POMDP to estimate the gradi-
ent (with respect to the parameters of the baseline function) of this distance. We need to make the
following assumptions about the parameterized baseline functions.
Assumption 6. There are bounds M, G < ∞ such that for all y ∈ Y , and all ω ∈ RL , the baseline
function is bounded, bY (y, ω) ≤ M, and the gradient of the baseline is bounded, ∇bY (y, ω) ≤ G.
   We drop ω in the notation, and, to avoid confusion, we write g2 (y, u) to denote [(∇µu (y))/µu (y)]2 ,
where the gradient is with respect to the parameters of the policy, θ.
Theorem 20. Let D = (S , U , Y , P, ν, r, µ) be a controlled POMDP satisfying Assumptions 1, 2
and 3. Let bY : Y × RL → R be a parameterized baseline function satisfying Assumption 6. If
{Xt ,Yt ,Ut } is a sample path of the controlled POMDP (for any X0 ), then with probability 1
        1 2                1 T                              t−1
          ∇σY (bY ) = lim ∑ bY (Yt−1 ) − βbY (Yt ) − r(Xt ) ∑ βt−s−1 ∇bY (Ys )g2 (Ys ,Us ) .
        2             T →∞ T
                             t=1                             s=0

Proof. From Theorem 16,
                       1 2             h                                 i
                         ∇σY (bY ) = Eπ g2 (y, u) ∇bY (y) bY (y) − b∗Y (y) ,
                       2
but
                          h                        i
                        Eπ g2 (y, u) ∇bY (y)b∗Y (y)
                           =    ∑ πi νy (i)µu (y)g2 (y, u) ∇bY (y)
                               i,y,u

                                           ∑ı̃,ũ,˜ πı̃ νy (ı̃)µũ (y)pı̃˜(ũ)g2 (y, ũ) Jβ (˜)
                                       ×
                                                    ∑ı̃,ũ πı̃ νy (ı̃)µũ (y)g2 (y, ũ)
                           =   ∑ ∇bY (y) ∑ πi νy (i)µu (y)pi j (u)g2 (y, u) Jβ ( j)
                                y              i,u, j

                           = Eπ ∇bY (y)g2 (y, u) Jβ ( j) .
                                                       


                                                        1496
                            VARIANCE R EDUCTION OF G RADIENT E STIMATES IN RL




Also, as bY (Yt ) is uniformly bounded, we can write
                                                ∞
                                  bY (Yt ) =    ∑ βs−t−1 (bY (Ys−1 ) − βbY (Ys )).
                                               s=t+1

The boundedness of r, and the dominated convergence theorem, likewise gives Jβ (Xt+1 ) = E[∑∞
                                                                                            s=t+1 β
                                                                                                   s−t−1 r(X )|X
                                                                                                            s   t+1 ].
Now we have
                                            ∞
                       "                                                               #
      1 2
       ∇σ (bY ) = Eπ g (Yt ,Ut ) ∇bY (Yt ) ∑ β
                          2                     s−t−1
                                                       bY (Ys−1 ) − βbY (Ys ) − r(Xs ) .
                                                                                      
                                                                                              (20)
      2 Y                                 s=t+1

The rest of the proof is as the proof of Baxter and Bartlett (2001, Theorem 4): we use an ergodicity
result to express the expectation as an average, then show that we can truncate the tail of the β
decaying sum.
     Assume X0 ∼ π. Write X̃t to denote the tuple (Xt ,Yt ,Ut ), write P̃ to denote the correspond-
ing transition matrix, and write π̃ to denote the corresponding stationary distribution (so π̃i,y,u =
πi νy (i)µu (y)). Now consider running the Markov chain on the process {X̃t } backwards. We have

                                                                                           π̃X̃ P̃X̃ X̃
                                                                        
                                        Pr X̃−1 , X̃0 , X̃1 , . . .   Pr X̃−1 P̃X̃−1 X̃0
            Pr X̃−1 |X̃0 , X̃1 , . . . =                             =                    = −1 −1 0 ,
                                                                             π̃X˜0              π̃X̃0
                                             
                                           Pr X̃0 , X̃1 , . . .

as π̃ is the unique distribution such that π̃0 P̃ = π̃0 . This gives the distribution for X̃−1 , and repeating
this argument gives the distribution for X̃−2 , X̃−3 , . . . . Denote this doubly infinite process by {X̃t }∞
                                                                                                            −∞ .
We wish to look at the behavior of time averages of the function
                                                       ∞
                           ∞
                       X̃t −∞ = g2 (Y0 ,U0 ) ∇bY (Y0 ) ∑ βs−1 bY (Ys−1 ) − βbY (Ys ) − r(Xs ) .
                           
                               def                                                           
              f
                                                         s=1

Specifically, we would like to show that

                               1 T −1  m  ∞             ∞
                                 ∑
                                                      h      i
                          lim        f S    X̃t −∞ = E f X̃t −∞ ,                     w.p.1                (21)
                          T →∞ T
                                 m=0

where Sm denotes m applications of the shift operator S, and where S({X̃t }∞                  ∞
                                                                                 −∞ ) = {Wt }−∞ with
Wt = X̃t+1 for all t. Doob (1994, L2 Ergodic theorem, pg. 119) tells us, provided that S is one-to-one
and measure preserving, and that f is square integrable, the left hand side of Equation (21) is almost
surely constant, and furthermore, provided that the only invariant sets of S are sets of measure zero
and their complements, this constant is equal to the right hand side of Equation (21). Expanding f
and S in Equation (21) then gives, with probability one,
                                                    ∞
    1 2                1 T −1 2
      ∇σY (bY ) = lim    ∑   g (Yt ,Ut ) ∇bY (Yt ) ∑ βs−t−1 bY (Ys−1 ) − βbY (Ys ) − r(Xs ) .
                                                                                           
                                                                                                           (22)
    2             T →∞ T
                         t=0                      s=t+1

It remains to be shown that the conditions of the L2 Ergodic theorem hold.

   1. S is one-to-one. By considering how S behaves at each index, we see that it is a bijection.

                                                         1497
                            G REENSMITH , BARTLETT AND BAXTER




2. S is measure preserving. That is, for a set of sequences A, A and S(A) have the same measure.
   This follows from the Markov property, and from the fact that the transition operator at time t,
   as well as the marginal distribution on Xt , is identical for all times t. Specifically, we have the
   following. Let A− ⊂ A be the smallest set such that Pr{{Wt }∞                         ∞
                                                                    −∞ ∈ A} = Pr{{Wt }−∞ ∈ A ∩A},
                                                                                                 −

   and write As = {Ws : {Wt }∞        −          s2          s2        ∞       −
                               −∞ ∈ A } and As1 = {{Wt }s1 : {Wt }−∞ ∈ A }, where {Wt }s1 is the
                                                                                                s2

   process starting at t = s1 and ending at t = s2 . For any s we have

                  ∞                                              ∞
           n          o   Z                              n                           o
                                            Pr X̃s+1 = x Pr X̃t s+2 ∈ A∞
                                              
         Pr S X̃t −∞ ∈ A   =                                                   X̃
                                                                         s+1 s+1     = x
                                       x∈As
                                                n                        o
                                                       s
                                            × Pr X̃t −∞ ∈ As−1
                                                             −∞ X̃s+1 = x   C(dx)
                                      Z                   n  ∞                     o
                                            Pr X̃s = x Pr X̃t s+1 ∈ A∞
                                              
                                    =                                 s+1  X̃s  = x
                                       x∈As
                                                n                     o
                                                       s−1
                                            × Pr X̃t −∞ ∈ As−1
                                                             −∞ X̃s = x C(dx)
                                               ∞
                                        n            o
                                    = Pr X̃t −∞ ∈ A .

   We also have that S−1 (the inverse of S) is measure preserving; by the change of variables
   {Wt }∞            ∞
        −∞ = S({X̃t }−∞ ).

3. f is square integrable. The measure on {X̃t }∞
                                                −∞ is finite, and |f| is bounded.

4. If set A is such that S−1 (A) = A (where S−1 (A) = {{Wt }∞                   ∞
                                                                   −∞ : S({Wt }−∞ ) ∈ A}), then either
   A has measure zero, or A has measure one. Consider a set A of positive measure such that
   S−1 (A) = A, and write Ā for its complement. As S is a bijection, we also have that S−1 (Ā) =
   Ā. Assumption 1 implies that At = S̃ (at least, this is true for the state component, and,
   without loss of generality, we may assume it is true for the extended space). If we assume
   that A0 ∩ Ā0 = /0, and hence At ∩ Āt = 0/ for all t, then the measure of Ā must be zero. We will
   show that A0 ∩ Ā0 = /0.
   Unless Ā has measure zero, for each x ∈ A0 ∩ Ā0 we must have that Pr{{Wt }−1     −1
                                                                               −∞ ∈ Ā−∞ |W0 = x}
                 ∞     ∞
   and Pr{{Wt }1 ∈ A1 |W0 = x} are both positive, by the Markov property. Hence if A0 ∩ Ā0 is
   non-empty there must be a set of positive measure, which we denote B, that follows sequences
   in Ā− until time t = 0, and then follows sequences in A− . Without loss of generality, let us
   assume that B ⊂ A− . We will also assume that if b ∈ B then S−1 (b) ∈ B, as the existence of B
   implies the existence of B̂ = B ∪ {S−1 (b)} with the same properties. We will show that such
   a B does not exist, and therefore A0 ∩ Ā0 = /0.
   Let As∗            ∞        s        s                                         −
         −∞ = {{Wt }−∞ : {Wt }−∞ ∈ A−∞ }, the set of sequences that follow A until time s,
   and then follow any sequence. We have that B0∗            0∗                       ∗
                                                     −∞ ⊂ Ā−∞ . Construct the set B ⊂ B by
     ∗             −t            −t
   B = limt→∞ S (B) (note, S (B) is a non-increasing sequence of sets, and hence its limit
   exists). We have that S−t (B) ⊂ S−t (B)t∗        −t 0∗         −t 0∗        t∗           ∗
                                            −∞ = S (B−∞ ) ⊂ S (Ā−∞ ) = Ā−∞ , and so B =
   lim inft→∞ S−t (B) ⊂ lim supt→∞ Āt∗      −                                        t∗
                                     −∞ = Ā , where the last equality follows from Ā−∞ being
   non-increasing. Furthermore, by the dominated convergence theorem we have Pr{{Ws }∞    −∞ ∈
   B∗ } = limt→∞ Pr{{Ws }∞   ∈ S −t (B)} = Pr{{W }∞ ∈ B} > 0. This means that the set B∗ has
                          −∞                     s −∞
   positive measure and is a subset of both A and Ā, which is impossible, and so such a B does
   not exist.

                                               1498
                         VARIANCE R EDUCTION OF G RADIENT E STIMATES IN RL




    The statement given by Equation (21) is for a sample such that X0 ∼ π, but can be generalized to
an arbitrary distribution using the convergence of {Xt } to stationarity. Indeed, for the finite chains
we consider, all states have positive π-measure, and hence Equation (22) holds for X0 ∼ π only if it
holds for all X0 ∈ S .
    If we truncate the inner sum at T , the norm of the error is

                                                      ∞
                     1 T −1 2
                         ∑                 ∇bY t ∑ β             bY (Ys−1 ) − βbY (Ys ) − r(Xs )
                                                           s−t−1
                                                                                                
                lim          g  (Y t ,Ut )     (Y )
                T →∞ T
                         t=0                        s=T +1
                                                                            ∞
                                                                                            !
                                 T −1
                              1
                 =      lim
                       T →∞ T
                                 ∑ g (Yt ,Ut ) ∇bY (Yt )β bY (YT ) − ∑ β r(Xs )
                                        2                  T                    s−t−1
                                 t=0                                    s=T +1
                               T −1                       
                            1                          R
                 ≤ lim
                     T →∞ T
                               ∑     B2 GβT M +
                                                      1−β
                               t=0
                 = 0,

where we have used Assumptions 2, 3, and 6. This gives

    1 2                        1 T −1 2                     T
     ∇σ (bY ) =                  ∑                ∇bY t ∑ β
                                                                s−t−1
                                                                      bY (Ys−1 ) − βbY (Ys ) − r(Xs ) ,
                                                                                                     
                          lim        g  (Yt ,Ut )    (Y )
    2 Y                   T →∞ T
                                 t=0                      s=t+1

and changing the order of summation gives the result.

    Theorem 20 suggests the use of Algorithm 1 to compute the gradient of σ2Y (bY ) with respect to
the parameters of the baseline function bY . The theorem implies that, as the number of samples T
gets large, the estimate produced by this algorithm approaches the true gradient.

Algorithm 1 Compute estimate of gradient of distance to optimal baseline
  given
      • A controlled POMDP (S , U , Y , P, ν, r, µ).
      • The sequence of states, observations and controls generated by the controlled POMDP,
        {i0 , y0 , u0 , i1 , y1 , . . . , iT −1 , yT −1 , uT −1 , iT , yT }.
       • A parameterized baseline function bY : Y × RL → R.
  write g2 (y, u) to denote [(∇µu (y))/µu (y)]2 .
  set z0 = 0 (z0 ∈ RL ), ∆0 = 0 (∆0 ∈ RL )
  for all {it , yt , ut , it+1 , yt+1 } do
     zt+1 = βzt + ∇bY (yt , ω)g2 (yt , ut )
     ∆t+1 = ∆t + t+1      1
                                 bY (yt , ω) − βbY (yt+1 , ω) − r(xt+1 ) zt+1 − ∆t
                                                                                  

  end for

    In Bartlett and Baxter (2002) a variant of the GPOMDP algorithm is shown to give an estimate
that, in finite time and with high probability, is close to ∇β η. A similar analysis could be performed
for the estimate produced by Algorithm 1, in particular, we could replace ∇t = (∇µUt (Yt ))/µUt (Ut )
and Rt = r(Xt ) in Bartlett and Baxter (2002) with ∇      ˜ t = g2 (Yt ,Ut ) ∇bY (Yt ) and R̃t = bY (Yt−1 ) −
βbY (Yt ) − r(Xt ). Notice that ∇t and Rt occur in precisely the same way in GPOMDP to produce an

                                                        1499
                                G REENSMITH , BARTLETT AND BAXTER




estimate of
                                                  ∞
                                           "                    #
                                         E ∇t    ∑ βs−t−1 Rs
                                                s=t+1

as ∇
   ˜ t and R̃t occur in Algorithm 1 to produce an estimate of
                                               ∞
                                          "                  #
                                        E ∇ ˜t ∑ β  s−t−1
                                                          R̃s .
                                                s=t+1

    Algorithm 2 gives an online version of Algorithm 1. The advantage of such an algorithm is that
the baseline may be updated whilst the estimate of the performance gradient is being calculated.
Such a strategy for updates would, however, affect the convergence of performance gradient esti-
mates (for constant baselines this may be avoided, see Section 8.2). The question of the convergence
of Algorithm 2, and the convergence of performance gradient estimates in the presence of online
baseline updates, is not addressed in this paper; though simulations in Sections 8.2 and 8.3 show
that performing such online baseline updates can give improvements.

Algorithm 2 Online version of Algorithm 1
  given
      • A controlled POMDP (S , U , Y , P, ν, r, µ).
      • The sequence of states, observations and controls generated by the controlled POMDP,
        {i0 , y0 , u0 , i1 , y1 , . . . , iT −1 , yT −1 , uT −1 , iT , yT }.
      • A parameterized baseline function bY : Y × RL → R.
       • A sequence of step sizes, γt
  write g2 (y, u) to denote [(∇µu (y))/µu (y)]2 .
  set z0 = 0 (z0 ∈ RL )
  for all {it , yt , ut , it+1 , yt+1 } do
     zt+1 = βzt + ∇bY (yt , ωt )g2 (yt , ut )
     ωt+1 = ωt − γt bY (yt , ωt ) − βbY (yt+1 , ωt ) − r(xt+1 ) zt+1
                                                               

  end for


7.2 Minimizing Bound on Squared Error when using a Value Function
Given a controlled MDP and a parameterized class of value functions,
                                   V(·, ω) : S → R| ω ∈ RL ,
                                 

we wish to choose a value function to minimize the expected squared error of our gradient estimates.
Theorem 18 gives a bound on this error,
                        Ω∗         ∇µu (i)                 ∇µu (i)
                                                                        2
                 ET =       Varπ           V( j, ω) + Eπ           A ( j, ω)    .
                         T          µu (i)                   µu (i) β
We drop ω in the notation, and write g(i, u) to denote (∇µu (i))/µu (i), where the gradient is with
respect to the policy parameters, θ. We can compute the gradient of this bound:
                 1 Ω∗
                                                                   
   1                                                            2
  ∇ ET = ∇
                                                 
                         Varπ (g(i, u)V( j)) + Eπ g(i, u)Aβ ( j)
   2             2 T

                                                   1500
                     VARIANCE R EDUCTION OF G RADIENT E STIMATES IN RL




            1 Ω∗                         i Ω∗
                       h                                                                      
                                                                                           2
                   ∇Eπ (g(i, u)V( j)) −2
                                                ∇ (Eπ [g(i, u)V( j)]) + ∇ Eπ g(i, u)Aβ ( j)
                                                                     2      
          =
            2 T                              T
             Ω
             ∗
                 Eπ (g(i, u)V( j))0 g(i, u) (∇V( j))0
                                                     
          =
              T
              Ω∗
                  (Eπ [g(i, u)V( j)])0 Eπ g(i, u) (∇V( j))0
                                                           
            −
               T
                                0                        
                                      Eπ g(i, u) (∇V( j))0
                                        
            − Eπ g(i, u)Aβ ( j)                                .                             (23)

This gradient can be estimated from a single sample path of the controlled MDP, {Xs ,Us }. We need
the following assumption on the value function.

Assumption 7. There are bounds M, G < ∞ such that for all i ∈ S , and all ω ∈ RL , the value
function is bounded, |V(i, ω)| ≤ M, and the gradient of the value function is bounded, k∇V(i, ω)k ≤
G.

    Algorithm 3 gives an estimate of (23) from a sample path of the controlled MDP; constructing
this estimate from the following four estimations:


                        1 S−1
             ∆AS =        ∑   (g(Xs ,Us )V(Xs+1 ))0 g(Xs ,Us ) (∇V(Xs+1 ))0 ∈ R1×L ;
                                                                           
                        S s=0

                        1 S−1
             ∆BS =        ∑ g(Xs ,Us )V(Xs+1 )
                        S s=0
                                                                               ∈ RK ;

                        1 S−1
             ∆CS =        ∑ (r(Xs+1 ) + βV(Xs+2 ) − V(Xs+1 )) zs+1
                        S s=0
                                                                               ∈ RK ;

                        1 S−1
             ∆DS =        ∑ g(Xs ,Us ) (∇V(Xs+1 ))0
                        S s=0
                                                                               ∈ RK×L ,


where z0 = 0 and zs+1 = βzs + g(Xs ,Us ). The estimate of the gradient then becomes
                                                                      0
                                      Ω∗       Ω∗ 0
                                  
                           ∆S =          ∆AS −   ∆BS ∆DS − ∆C0S ∆DS        .
                                      T        T

    Notice that ∆AS , ∆BS , and ∆DS are simply sample averages (produced by the Markov chain)
estimating the relevant expectations in Equation (23). We see from Theorem 3 and Corollary 5 that
the variance of these estimates are O(ln(S)/S), giving swift convergence. By noting the similarity
between the expectation in Equation (20) and the expectation estimated by ∆CS , we see that the
ergodicity and truncation arguments of Theorem 20, and the convergence discussion following, also
hold for the ∆CS estimate.
    An online implementation is complicated by the multiplication of expectations. The online
algorithm (Algorithm 4) uses a decaying window of time (normalized for the rate of decay) in the
calculation of the expectations.

                                                1501
                              G REENSMITH , BARTLETT AND BAXTER




Algorithm 3 Compute estimate of gradient of squared error wrt value function parameter
  given
      • A controlled POMDP (S , U , Y , P, ν, r, µ).
      • The sequence of states, observations and controls generated by the controlled POMDP,
        {i0 , u0 , i1 , . . . , iS , uS , iS+1 }.
      • A parameterized value function V : S × RL → R.
  write g(i, u) to denote (∇µu (i))/µu (i).
  set z0 = 0 (z0 ∈ RK ), ∆A0 = 0 (∆A0 ∈ RL ), ∆B0 = 0 (∆B0 ∈ RK ), ∆C0 = 0 (∆C0 ∈ RK ) and
  ∆D0 = 0 (∆D0 ∈ RK×L )
  for all {is , us , is+1 , is+2 } do
     zs+1 = βzs + g(is , us )
     ∆As+1 = ∆As + s+1       1
                                  (g(is , us )V(is+1 ))0 g(is , us ) (∇V(is+1 ))0 − ∆As
                                                                                       

     ∆Bs+1 = ∆Bs + s+1       1
                                (g(is , us )V(is+1 ) − ∆Bs )
     ∆Cs+1 = ∆Cs + s+1 ((r(is+1 ) + βV(is+2 ) − V(is+1 )) zs+1 − ∆Cs )
                              1

     ∆Ds+1 = ∆Ds + s+1        1
                                   g(is , us ) (∇V(is+1 ))0 − ∆Ds
                                                                    

  end for                                           0
  ∆S = ΩT ∆AS − ΩT ∆B0S ∆DS − ∆C0S ∆DS
           ∗              ∗




Algorithm 4 Online version of Algorithm 3
  given
      • A controlled POMDP (S , U , Y , P, ν, r, µ).
      • The sequence of states, observations and controls generated by the controlled POMDP,
        {i0 , u0 , i1 , . . . , iS , uS , iS+1 }.
      • α ∈ R, 0 < α < 1
      • A sequence of step sizes, γs
      • A parameterized value function V : S × RL → R.
  write g(i, u) to denote (∇µu (i))/µu (i).
  set z0 = 0 (z0 ∈ RK ), ∆A0 = 0 (∆A0 ∈ RL ), ∆B0 = 0 (∆B0 ∈ RK ), ∆C0 = 0 (∆C0 ∈ RK ) and
  ∆D0 = 0 (∆D0 ∈ RK×L )
  for all {is , us , is+1 , is+2 } do
     zs+1 = βzs + g(is , us )
     ∆As+1 = α∆As + (g(is , us )V(is+1 ))0 g(is , us ) (∇V(is+1 ))0
                                                                     

     ∆Bs+1 = α∆Bs + g(is , us )V(is+1 )
     ∆Cs+1 = α∆Cs + (r(is+1 ) + βV(is+2 ) − V(is+1 )) zs+1
     ∆Ds+1 = α∆Ds         + g(is , us ) (∇V(is+1 ))0                                      0
                                       ∗               2 ∗                 2
                                          Ω                 Ω
     ωs+1 = ωs − γs              1−α
                               1−αs+1     T ∆AS − 1−αs+1
                                                      1−α
                                                             T ∆BS ∆DS − 1−αs+1
                                                                 0        1−α
                                                                                   ∆CS ∆DS
                                                                                     0

  end for



                                                1502
                      VARIANCE R EDUCTION OF G RADIENT E STIMATES IN RL




7.3 Minimizing the Bias Error when using a Value Function
As the number of steps T gets large, the error ET of the gradient estimate becomes proportional to
the square of the bias error,
                                                          2
                                   E∞ = Eπ g(i, u)Aβ ( j) .
The gradient of this quantity, with respect to the parameters of the value function, can be computed
using Algorithm 3, with Ω∗ /T = 0. In this case, only ∆Cs and ∆Ds need to be computed.

7.4 Minimizing Bound on Sample Error when using a Value Function
A more restrictive approach is to minimize the error seen at each sample,
                                                           2
                                     R = Eπ g(i, u)Aβ ( j) .

This approach directly drives V towards Jβ and as such does not aim for additional beneficial cor-
relation. It produces an algorithm that is very similar to TD Sutton (1988), but has the benefit that
the relative magnitude of the gradient with respect to the policy parameters is taken into account. In
this way, more attention is devoted to accuracy inregions of the state space with large gradients.
    For a parameterized class of value functions, V(·, ω) : S → R| ω ∈ RL , we can determine the
gradient of this quantity.
                        1     1                 2
                       ∇ R = ∇ Eπ g(i, u)Aβ ( j)
                        2     2 h
                                                   0            i
                           = −Eπ g(i, u) (∇V( j))0 g(i, u)Aβ ( j)
                                h                        i
                           = −Eπ (g(i, u))2 ∇V( j)Aβ ( j) .

If the value function satisfies Assumption 7, the gradient may be estimated by a single sample path
from a controlled MDP. The ergodicity and truncation argument is the same as that in the proof of
Theorem 20.
                                     1 T
                              ∆RT = ∑ (r(Xt ) + βV(Xt+1 ) − V(Xt )) zt ,
                                    T t=1

where z0 = 0, and zt+1 = βzt + (g(Xt ,Ut ))2 ∇V(Xt+1 ).

8. Simulation Examples
This section describes some experiments performed in simulated environments. First, the estimates
suggested by Sections 5 and 6 are tested in a simple, simulated setting. This simple setting is then
used to test the algorithms of Section 7. Finally, a larger, target-tracking setting is used to test a
number of gradient estimates at various stages of the learning process.

8.1 Three State MDP, using Discounted Value Function
This section describes experiments comparing choices of control variate for a simple three state
MDP. The system is the described in detail in Baxter et al. (2001). The gradient ∇η was compared
to the gradient estimates produced with a variety of schemes: GPOMDP without any control variate;
a constant baseline set to Eπ Jβ (i); the optimum constant baseline, described in Theorem 11; the

                                                1503
                                G REENSMITH , BARTLETT AND BAXTER




optimum baseline function, described in Corollary 15; and a value function that was trained using
Algorithm 3 with Ω∗ /T set to 0.001. This value function had a distinct parameter for each state, all
initially set to zero.
     Because of its simplicity, a number of quantities can be computed explicitly, including the true
gradient ∇η, the discounted value function Jβ , the expectation of the discounted value function,
the optimal baseline, and the optimal constant baseline. All experiments used the precomputed
discounted value function in their ∇β η estimations rather than the discounted sum of future rewards,
an estimate of the discounted value function. For each experiment, the data was collected over 500
independent runs, with β = 0.95.
     Figures 2 and 3 plot the mean and standard deviation (respectively) of the relative norm differ-
ence of the gradient estimate from ∇η, as a function of the number of time steps. The relative norm
difference of a gradient estimate ∆ from the true gradient ∇η is given by

                                               k∆ − ∇ηk
                                                        .
                                                 k∇ηk

     It is clear from the figures that the use of these control variates gives significant variance reduc-
tions over GPOMDP. It is also clear that the optimum baseline gives better performance than the use
of the expectation of the discounted value function as a baseline. For this MDP, the performance
difference between the optimum baseline and the optimum constant baseline is small; the optimum
baseline of this system, b∗Y = (6.35254, 6.35254, 6.26938)0 , is close to a constant function. The
optimum constant baseline is b∗ = 6.33837.
     Since the value of Ω∗ /T was fixed when optimizing the value function, the asymptotic error of
its associated gradient estimate is non-zero, as Figure 2 shows. However, the expected error remains
smaller than that of GPOMDP for all but very large values of T , and the standard deviation is always
smaller.

8.2 Online Training
Instead of precomputing the optimum baseline, and pretraining the value function, they could be
learned online, whilst estimating ∇β η. Figures 4 and 5 show experiments on the same three state
MDP as in Section 8.1, but here the baseline and value function were learned online, using Al-
gorithm 2 and Algorithm 4 respectively. GPOMDP and baseline plots were over 500 independent
runs, the value function plots were over 1000 independent runs. A β value of 0.95 was used, and
the online training step size γt was set to 1/ln(1 + t). For the value function, Ω∗ /T was set to 0.01
and α was set to 0.99. The baseline and the value function had a parameter for each state and were
initially set to zero.
     It is clear from the figures that the online baseline algorithm gives a significant improvement
from the GPOMDP algorithm. Looking at the error using the online value function algorithm we
see a performance increase over GPOMDP until T becomes large.
     Note that the baseline, when trained online, is non-stationary, and the gradient estimate becomes

                           1 T −1 ∇µUt (Yt )
                                                                                !
                                                   T
                         ∆= ∑                      ∑ β   s−t−1
                                                                 r(Xs ) − bt (Yt ) .
                           T t=0 µUt (Yt )       s=t+1


                                                  1504
                                           VARIANCE R EDUCTION OF G RADIENT E STIMATES IN RL




                                               Exact Value Function—Mean Error
                            0.4
                                                                            GPOMDP-Jβ
                           0.35                                                 BL-EJβ




Relative Norm Difference
                                                                              BL-b∗Y (y)
                            0.3                                                  BL-b∗
                                                                             VF-pretrain
                           0.25
                            0.2
                           0.15
                            0.1
                           0.05
                             0
                                  1   10        100     1000       10000   100000   1e+06   1e+07
                                                               T

Figure 2: The mean of the relative norm difference from ∇η: using no control variate (GPOMDP-
          Jβ ); using the expected discounted value function as a baseline (BL-EJβ ); using the opti-
          mum baseline (BL-b∗Y (y)); using the optimal constant baseline (BL-b∗ ); and using a pre-
          trained value function (VF-pretrained). In all cases the explicitly calculated discounted
          value function was used in place of the estimates Jt (except, of course, for the pretrained
          value function case, where the value function is used in place of the estimates Jt .)


                                            Exact Value Function—Standard Deviation
                            0.4
                                                                            GPOMDP-Jβ
                           0.35                                                 BL-EJβ




Relative Norm Difference
                                                                              BL-b∗Y (y)
                            0.3                                                  BL-b∗
                                                                             VF-pretrain
                           0.25
                            0.2
                           0.15
                            0.1
                           0.05
                             0
                                  1   10        100     1000       10000   100000   1e+06   1e+07
                                                               T

Figure 3: The standard deviation of the relative norm difference from ∇η (see Figure 2 for an
          explanation of the key).



                                                                   1505
                               G REENSMITH , BARTLETT AND BAXTER




This non-stationarity could mean an additional bias in the estimate, though we can see by the graphs
that, at least in this case, this additional bias is small. The estimate that we actually use is
                               1 T
                          ∆=     ∑ zt (r(Xt ) − (bt−1 (Yt−1 ) − βbt−1 (Yt ))) ,
                               T t=1
where zt , the eligibility trace, is given by z0 = 0 and zt+1 = βzt + (∇µUt (Yt ))/µUt (Yt ). One might
argue that this additionally correlates our baseline with any errors due to the truncation of the sum
of discounted future rewards. This should make little difference, except for small T ; we have seen
                                    (+S)
that, for the modified estimate ∆T (bY ), any influence this error has is exponentially decreasing.
    Note that for any constant baseline we need not worry about non-stationarity, as we have
                                                           !
                                T                        T
                               ∑ zt (bT − βbT ) =        ∑ zt (1 − β)bT ,
                               t=1                       t=1

so by additionally keeping track of ΣT = ∑t=1
                                          T
                                              zt we have the estimate, at time T ,
                   1 T                               1 T              1
                     ∑
                   T t=1
                         zt (r(Xt ) − (bT − βbT )) =   ∑
                                                     T t=1
                                                           zt r(Xt ) − ΣT (1 − β)bT ,
                                                                      T
an unbiased estimate of ∇β η; again, treating the error due to the truncation of the discounted sum
of future rewards as negligible.

8.3 Locating a Target
These experiments deal with the task of a puck, moving in a plane, learning to locate a target. The
puck had unit mass, 0.05 unit radius, and was controlled by applying a 5 unit force in either the
positive or negative x direction and either the positive or negative y direction. The puck moved
within a 5 × 5 unit area with elastic walls and a coefficient of friction of 0.0005; gravity being set
to 9.8. The simulator worked at a granularity of 1/100 of a second with controller updates at every
1/20 of a second. The distance between the puck and the target location was given as a reward at
each update time. Every 30 seconds this target and the puck was set to a random location, and the
puck’s x and y velocities set randomly in the range [−10, 10].
    The puck policy was determined by a neural network with seven inputs, no hidden layer, and
four outputs; the outputs computing a tanh squashing function. The inputs to the controller were:
the x and y location of the puck, scaled to be in [−1, 1]; the x and y location of the puck relative to
the target, scaled by the dimension sizes; the velocity of the puck, scaled such that a speed of 10
units per second was mapped to a value of 1; and a constant input of 1 to supply an offset. The
outputs of the neural network gave a weighting, ξi ∈ (0, 1), to each of the (x, y) thrust combinations:
(−5, −5); (−5, 5); (5, −5); and (5, 5). So, collating the seven inputs in the vector v, we have
                                                  !
                                          7
                             ξi = sqsh   ∑ θi,k vk ,           i ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4},
                                         k=1

where θ is a vector of 28 elements, one element, θi,k , for each i, k pair, and the squashing function
is sqsh(x) = (1 + tanh(x))/2. The probability of the ith thrust combination is then given by
                                                          ξi
                                           µi (v, θ) =         ,
                                                         ∑j ξj

                                                 1506
                                          VARIANCE R EDUCTION OF G RADIENT E STIMATES IN RL




                                                     Online—Mean Error
                            1
                                                                             GPOMDP
                                                                             BL-online




Relative Norm Difference
                           0.8                                               VF-online


                           0.6

                           0.4

                           0.2

                            0
                                 1   10        100     1000       10000   100000   1e+06   1e+07
                                                              T

Figure 4: The mean of the relative norm difference from ∇η: using no control variate (GPOMDP);
          using a baseline trained online (BL-online); and using a value function trained online
          (VF-online).


                                                 Online—Standard Deviation
                            1
                                                                             GPOMDP
                                                                             BL-online




Relative Norm Difference
                           0.8                                               VF-online


                           0.6

                           0.4

                           0.2

                            0
                                 1   10        100     1000       10000   100000   1e+06   1e+07
                                                              T

Figure 5: The standard deviation of the relative norm difference from ∇η (see Figure 4 for an
          explanation of the key).




                                                                  1507
                                G REENSMITH , BARTLETT AND BAXTER




where actions have been labelled with the associated thrust combination.
     The puck was first trained using conjugate gradient ascent, with GPOMDP (with T = 108 ) used
to estimate the gradient. The parameters of the policy were recorded at 28 points along the training
curve: at the initial parameter setting (θ = 0); and at each change in line search direction. Results
for 4 of the 28 points are shown in Figure 6. The results show the mean, over 100 independent trials,
of the relative norm difference between gradient estimates when using a range of different baselines,
all learned online (γt = 1/ ln(1 + t)) and initially set to zero, and an estimate of ∇β η. The second
order baseline was a second order polynomial of the inputs, that is, again collating the inputs in the
vector v,
                                                 7            7   7
                              b(v, ω) = ω0,0 + ∑ ωk,0 vk + ∑ ∑ ωk,l vk vl ,
                                                k=1          k=1 l=k
where ω is a vector of 32 elements, with one element, ωk,l , for each second order term vk vl , one
additional element, ωk,0 , for each first order term vk , and one additional element, ω0,0 , for the
constant term. The estimate of ∇β η was produced by averaging the unbiased ∇β η estimates at
T = 223 ; an average over 400 samples.
    Figure 6 shows that each baseline method performed better than GPOMDP, with the second
order baseline performing the best of these. The estimated average reward and the estimated optimal
constant baseline performed almost equally, and both performed better than the online constant
baseline in this case. That the two estimation methods performed almost equally would suggest
that, in this case, the random variables (∇µu (y)/µu (y))2 and Jβ ( j) are close to independent. It might
be that for most policies, or at least policies at the θ values we tested, kEπ Jβ (i)k  kJβ (i)−Eπ Jβ (i)k,
since this implies
       "                     #                                       "                                  #
            ∇µu (y) 2                      ∇µu (y) 2                     ∇µu (y) 2
                                                                              
                                                                                                         
   Eπ                  Jβ ( j) = Eπ                    Eπ Jβ (i) + Eπ                 Jβ ( j) − Eπ Jβ (i)
             µu (y)                         µu (y)                        µu (y)
                                           ∇µu (y) 2
                                                   
                                ≈ Eπ                   Eπ Jβ (i).
                                            µu (y)


9. Conclusions
We have shown that the use of control variate techniques can reduce estimation variance when
estimating performance gradients. The first technique was to add a baseline. Here we analyzed
the variance quantities of (8) and (9), the estimation variance when using a baseline under the
assumption that the discounted value function is known and samples may be drawn independently.
We have given the optimal baseline, the baseline that minimizes this variance, and have expressed
the additional variance resulting from using an arbitrary baseline as a weighted squared distance
from this optimum. Similar results have also been shown for a constant baseline. Here it was also
shown how much additional variance results from using the expected discounted value function, a
popular choice of baseline, in place of the optimal constant baseline. We have also shown that the
                           (+S)
estimation variance from ∆T (bY ), a realizable estimate of ∇β η formed from a single sample path
of the associated POMDP, is bounded by the stationary variance plus a term independent of the
choice of baseline, and another term of negligible magnitude.
    A second control variate technique used to reduce estimation variance was to replace estimates
of the discounted value function with some appropriate value function V. We have shown that, even

                                                     1508
                                  
                                                     
                                                         
                                                         
                                                          
                                            VARIANCE R EDUCTION OF G RADIENT E STIMATES IN RL




 Relative Norm Difference
                            0.8

                            0.6
                                  +



                                     
                                      
                                         
                                               
                                                
                                                 
                                             Point 0




                                                       
                                                        
                                                          
                                                          
                                                           
                                                           
                                                       
                                                            
                                                            
                                                                   Relative Norm Difference
                                                                                               0.8

                                                                                               0.6 +
                                                                                                                Point 9




                                                         
                                                         
                                       +                                                             |    +




                                                         
                                                         
                            0.4 |                                                              0.4
                                            +




                                                          
                                                          
                                                                                                               +




                                                          
                                                          
                                                                                                          |
                                       |




                                                         
                                                         
                                                    +                                                                 +




                                                           
                                                           
                            0.2                                                                0.2             |




                                  
                                                    
                                                          
                                             |           +                                                             |   +
                                                               +




                                                            
                                                            
                                                     |
                                                                                                                                +|




                                                         
                                                          
                                                           
                                                         |                                                                 |




                                                           
                                                           
                                                                |




                                         
                                                          
                                                             
                             0                                                                  0




                                            
                                             
                                                           
                                                            
                                                            
                                                            
                                                             
                                  18   19   20      21   22                                          18   19   20     21   22




                                                       
                                                       
                                                           
                                                            
                                             log2 (T )                                                         log2 (T )
                                            Point 18                                                           Point 27

                                                                                                     +



 Relative Norm Difference                                           Relative Norm Difference
                            0.8                                                                0.8




                                                      
                            0.6                                                                0.6 |      +
                            0.4 +                                                              0.4        |
                                                                                                               +
                                  |    +                                                                       |
                                                                                                                      +
                            0.2        |    +                                                  0.2                     |   +
                                             |      +|   +|                                                                |    +|
                             0                                 +|                               0
                                  18   19   20      21   22                                          18   19   20     21   22
                                             log2 (T )                                                         log2 (T )
Figure 6: Each plot shows the mean, over 100 independent runs, of the relative norm difference
          from ∇β η: using no baseline (     ); using a constant baseline, trained online ( + ); using
          a second order polynomial of the inputs as a baseline, trained online (     ); using Eπ Jβ (i)
          as a baseline, estimated online (     ); and using the optimal constant baseline, estimated
          online ( | ). The reference ∇β η is estimated by averaging the unbiased estimates at
          T = 223 . The four plots show four of the 28 parameter values at the end points of each
          line search in the conjugate gradient ascent algorithm, when training on the target location
          example using GPOMDP (with T = 108 ) to produce gradient estimates. The remaining
          24 parameter values give similar plots.




                                                                    1509
                                G REENSMITH , BARTLETT AND BAXTER




if the discounted value function is known, selecting V to be equal to the discounted value function
is not necessarily the best choice. We have shown examples where this is the case; where additional
reduction in estimation variance can be achieved by selecting V to be a function other than the
discounted value function, with no addition of estimation bias. We have also given a bound on the
expected squared error of the estimate ∆V T , an estimate of ∇β η that uses V in place of discounted
value function estimates and is formed from a single sample path of the associated MDP.
                              (+S)
    The gradient estimates ∆T (bY ) and ∆V   T use a baseline bY and a value function V, respectively,
in their calculations. In experiments on a toy problem we investigated the improvements obtained
                                                   (+S)
when using the optimal choice of baseline in ∆T (bY ), and also when using the value function
minimizing the bound on expected squared error of estimates in ∆V    T . Significant improvement was
shown.
    In general the optimal choices for the baseline and the value function may not be known. We
have explored the idea of using gradient descent on the error bounds derived in this paper to learn a
good choice for a baseline, or for a value function. We have given realizable algorithms to obtain the
appropriate gradient estimates, along with their online versions. In experiments on the toy problem,
and in a target location problem, we have seen some improvements given by these algorithms.
    In experiments we have looked at using the online versions of the algorithms in Section 7; updat-
ing the baseline (or value function) whilst estimating the gradient of the performance. Consequently
some additional bias in the performance gradient estimate is likely to have occurred. The results of
the experiments, however, would suggest that this bias is small. Further work of interest is the study
of the convergence of these online algorithms, and also the convergence of the performance whilst
using these online algorithms.


Acknowledgments

Most of this work was performed while the authors were with the Research School of Information
Sciences and Engineering at the Australian National University, supported in part by the Australian
Research Council.


Appendix A. Discussion of Assumption 1
The details in this section can be found in texts covering Markov chains; see, for example, Puterman
(1994); Grimmett and Stirzaker (1992); Seneta (1981). We include them to: define the terms used
in Assumption 1; show how Assumption 1 may be relaxed; and give an intuition of our use of
Assumption 1.
     The states of a Markov chain M = (S , P) can be divided into equivalence classes under the
communicating relation ↔. We define i ↔ i, and write i ↔ j if there are integers m, n > 0 such
       (m)            (n)               (t)
that pi j > 0 and p ji > 0, where pi j is the i jth entry of the t-step transition matrix Pt . We call a
class S̃ ⊂ S recurrent if its states are recurrent, otherwise we call it transient. A state is recurrent if
Pr{Xt = i for some t > 0|X0 = i} = 1, otherwise it is transient. Notice that this means that once the
chain enters a recurrent class it never leaves, but rather visits all states of that class infinitely often.
If the chain is finite then it will eventually leave every transient class and settle in some recurrent
class.

                                                   1510
                       VARIANCE R EDUCTION OF G RADIENT E STIMATES IN RL




    We say a Markov chain M = (S , P) is irreducible if the space S forms a single class under ↔;
necessarily a recurrent class for finite Markov chains. We can relax the irreducibility condition, and
instead allow any S that contains a single recurrent class SR plus a set (possibly containing more
than one class) of transient states ST such that Pr{Xt ∈ SR for some t > 0|X0 = j} = 1 for all j ∈ ST
(guaranteed for finite chains).
    The period, d, of a state i ∈ S of a Markov chain M = (S , P) is the greatest common divisor of
                            (t)
the set of times {t > 0 : pii > 0}. It is uniform across the states of a class. A state, and consequently
a class, is aperiodic if d = 1. We can relax the aperiodicity condition and allow arbitrary periods.
Consider SR to be constructed SR = S0 ∪ S1 ∪ · · · ∪ Sd−1 , where d is the period of SR and the sets Sk
are chosen such that Pr{Xt+1 ∈ Sk+1(mod d) |Xt ∈ Sk } = 1.
    Our interest is in the existence and uniqueness of the stationary distribution π. The existence of
π stems from the Markov chain reaching, and never leaving, a recurrent class, combined with the
forgetfulness of the Markov property. The uniqueness of π stems from us allowing only a single
recurrent class. So given a finite Markov chain M = (S , P) with the construction S = ST ∪ SR , and
SR = S0 ∪ S1 ∪ · · · ∪ Sd−1 , as above, we have, writing N[0,T ) (i) to denote the number of times state i
is visited before time T ,
                                    lim T −1 N[0,T ) (i) = πi ,     a.s.                             (24)
                                    T →∞

     Equation (24) is helpful in two ways. Firstly, our choice of performance measure, (2), is the
expected average of r(Xt ), where {Xt } is produced by the chain. We see from (24) that this value
is independent of the initial state, and we could equivalently use the expected value of r(X), with
X ∼ π. Secondly, we are interested in calculating expectations over the stationary distribution (such
as ∇β η), and we see from (24) that this expectation can be calculated by observing a single sample
path generated by the Markov chain, almost surely. In Section 4 it is seen that we can even do well
with a finite length sample path; it is here we use the assumption of irreducibility and aperiodicity.
     The analytical results of Section 5 and Section 6 use Theorem 3, Theorem 4 and Corollary 5 of
Section 4 to bound the variance terms of the form
                                                          !
                                                1 T −1
                                            Var   ∑ f(Xt ) ,
                                                T t=0
                                                                                                     (25)


where Xt is generated by a Markov chain M = (S , P) starting in the stationary distribution X0 ∼ π,
with variance terms of the form
                                                  Var(f(X)),                                         (26)

where X ∼ π. The proofs of these results use the property

                                           lim Pr {XT = i} = πi ,                                    (27)
                                           T →∞


which holds when SR is aperiodic, and is stronger than Equation (24). In particular, Equation (27)
holds with the addition of the set of transient states ST ; indeed the variance quantities of Equa-
tion (25) and (26) are not affected by such an addition, as the set ST has π-measure zero. Also,
                                (k)
when SR is periodic, writing Xt for the d-step subprocess with elements in Sk and π(k) for the

                                                    1511
                                  G REENSMITH , BARTLETT AND BAXTER




stationary distribution corresponding to this irreducible aperiodic chain, we have
                                !
               1 dT −1
        Var
              dT t=0∑ f(Xt )
                                             "                           #!2        
                            dT −1                   dT −1
                        1                         1
          = E
                       dT t=0∑    f(Xt ) − E         ∑ f(Xt ) X0 ∼ π
                                                 dT t=0
                                                                               X0 ∼ π
                                 "                           "                        #!
                1 d−1 d−1             1 T −1  (k1 )          1 T −1  (k1 ) 
          =
               d 2 k∑     ∑ E T ∑ f Xt − E T ∑ f Xt                             X0 ∼ π
                    1 =0 k2 =0           t=0                      t=0
                                                    "                           #!        #
                             1 T −1  (k2 )           1 T −1  (k2 ) 
                       ×        ∑ f Xt − E T ∑ f Xt
                             T t=0
                                                                          X0 ∼ π    X0 ∼ π
                                                          t=0
                                                    "                          #!2         
               2 d−1  1 T −1  (k)                    1 T −1  (k) 
          ≤       ∑ E T ∑ f Xt − E T ∑ f Xt X0 ∼ π
               d k=0
                                                                                     X0 ∼ π
                                  t=0                      t=0
                                                    "                              #!2           
                  d−1            T −1                     T −1 
               2               1                        1
                  ∑               ∑                        ∑
                                                                       
                                           (k)                      (k)    (k)            (k)
          =            E             f Xt       −E            f Xt       X0 ∼ π(k)     X0 ∼ π(k) 
               d k=0           T t=0                   T t=0
                                                !
               2 d−1           1 T −1  (k) 
          =       ∑
               d k=0
                       Var        ∑ f Xt
                               T t=0

                            (k)
(that the distribution of X0 is π(k) when X0 ∼ π is due to the sets Sk having equal π-measure.) It is
now straightforward to give analogous results to those of Section 5 and 6 when the Markov chain
consists of a single, possibly periodic, recurrent class plus a set of transient states.
    The justification in studying the variance quantity (25) is that, after leaving the set of states ST ,
the distribution over states will approach π exponentially quickly. Whilst this does not hold for
periodic chains, it does hold that the distribution over states restricted to the set of times {Tk + dt :
t ∈ {0, 1, 2 . . .}}, where Tk is the first time Xt hits the set Sk , will approach π(k) exponentially quickly.

Appendix B. Proofs for Section 4
In this section we give the proofs for Theorem 2, Theorem 3, Theorem 4, and Corollary 5 of Sec-
tion 4. Before giving the proof of Theorem 2 we first look at some properties of Markov chains. In
particular, we look at the covariance decay matrix of a finite ergodic Markov chain.
Definition 4. Let M = (S , P) be a finite ergodic Markov chain, and let π be its stationary distribu-
tion. We denote the covariance decay matrix of this chain by D(t), and define it by
                                             def 1             1
                                        D(t) = Π 2 Pt − eπ0 Π− 2
                                                           

                                      1        √ √               √             1       −1
where, given S = {1, 2, . . . , n}, Π 2 = diag( π1 , π2 , . . . , πn ), and Π− 2 = Π1/2 .
                                                                                  

    We will see that the gain of the auto-covariance over the variance can be bound by the spectral
norm of the covariance decay matrix. First we will give a bound on the spectral norm of the co-
variance decay matrix for general finite ergodic Markov chains. Then we will give a much tighter

                                                    1512
                       VARIANCE R EDUCTION OF G RADIENT E STIMATES IN RL




bound for reversible finite ergodic Markov chains. The spectral norm of a matrix is given by the
following definition.

Definition 5. The spectral norm of a matrix A is denoted kAkλ . It is the matrix norm induced by the
Euclidean norm,
                                                 def
                                          kAkλ = max kAxk .
                                                       kxk=1

An equivalent definition is
                                                           √
                                                                             λmax (A0 A),
                                                                            p
                         kAkλ = max kAxk = max                 x0 A0 Ax =
                                 kxk=1           kxk=1


where λmax (A) denotes the largest eigenvalue of the matrix A. As A0 A is symmetric and positive
semi-definite, all of its eigenvalues are real and positive.

Note 2. We have that, for any matrix A

                                            kAxk ≤ kAkλ kxk .

    This can be seen from: for kxk 6= 0
                                                                
                                                            x
                                         kAxk = A                    kxk .
                                                           kxk

    Recall the following two definitions.

Definition 6. The total variation distance between two distributions p, q on the finite set S is given
by
                                     def 1
                          dTV (p, q) = ∑ |pi − qi | = ∑ (pi − qi ).
                                         2 i∈S         i∈S :pi >qi


Definition 7. The mixing time of a finite ergodic Markov chain M = (S , P) is defined as
                                                                    
                               def
                              τ = min t > 0 : max dTV Pi , P j ≤ e
                                                       t t        −1
                                                              
                                                                       ,
                                                  i, j


where Pti denotes the ith row of the t-step transition matrix Pt .
                                          
                    def
Note 3. Denoting dt = maxi, j dTV Pit , Ptj , for s,t ≥ 1 we have that dt+s ≤ dt ds , and hence

                                           dt ≤ exp (− bt/τc) .

Note 4. We have that
                                          max dTV Pit , π ≤ dt .
                                                         
                                           i∈S


                                                   1513
                               G REENSMITH , BARTLETT AND BAXTER




    The sub-multiplicative property in Note 3 can be seen from

                                                 ∑
                                                                                                   
                                                                           (t+s)            (t+s)
              dTV Pit+s , Pt+s
                           j     =                                     pil          − p jl
                                            (t+s)        (t+s)
                                      l∈S :pil       >p jl

                                                 ∑                     ∑
                                                                                         
                                                                                (t)   (t)   (s)
                                 =                                             pik − p jk pkl
                                            (t+s)        (t+s) k∈S
                                      l∈S :pil       >p jl

                                           ∑                                                          ∑
                                                                                      
                                                                   (t)           (t)                                      (s)
                                 =                               pik − p jk                                              pkl
                                             (t)       (t)                                        (t+s)         (t+s)
                                      k∈S :pik >p jk                                       l∈S :pil        >p jl

                                                              ∑                                                       ∑
                                                                                                      
                                                                                    (t)          (t)                                      (s)
                                                 −                                 p jk − pik                                           pkl
                                                                 (t)     (t)                                        (t+s)       (t+s)
                                                     k∈S :p jk >pik                                        l∈S :pil         >p jl

                                                                                           ∑
                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                   (s)          (s)
                                 ≤ dTV Pit , Ptj max
                                                
                                                                                                                pk1 l − pk2 l
                                                              k1 ,k2 ∈S                (t+s)      (t+s)
                                                                               l∈S :pil        >p jl

                                                 Pit , Ptj ds ,
                                                          
                                 ≤ dTV                                                                                                            (28)

        (t)                                                                                                        (t) (s)                (t+s)
where pi j denotes the i jth component of Pt , and we have used that ∑l pil plk = pik . As dt ≤ 1,
this also implies dt is non-increasing (for t ≥ 1). The inequality in Note 3 then follows from applying
the sub-multiplicative property to τbt/τc ≤ t, giving
                                                   (
                                                             bt/τc
                                                        dτ                 t ≥ τ,
                                        dt ≤
                                                        1                  t < τ.

Note 4 can be seen from


                 ∑ ik k ∑ ∑ j ik jk ≤ ∑ π j ∑ pik − p jk .
                                             
                    (t)            (t)    (t)   (t)  (t)
                   p    − π = π   p    − p
                 k∈S              k∈S j∈S                                                  j∈S         k∈S


We will also consider the following, asymmetric, notion of distance.

Definition 8. The χ2 distance between the distribution p and the distribution q on the finite set S ,
with qi > 0 for all i ∈ S , is given by
                                                                                           !1/2
                                                                 (pi − qi )2
                                                             ∑ qi
                                                 def
                                  dχ2 (p, q) =                                                    .
                                                             i∈S


Lemma 21. Let M = (S , P) be a finite ergodic Markov chain, and let π be its stationary distribution.
There exists a mixing time τ, which is a property of M, such that
                  q                  2 q
         kD(t)kλ ≤ Ei∼π dχ2 (Pti , π) ≤ 2 |S | max dTV (Pti , π) ≤ 2 |S | exp (− bt/τc).
                                                                  p
                                                                       i∈S

                          p
Thus we have kD(t)kλ ≤     2 |S | exp (− bt/τc).


                                                             1514
                       VARIANCE R EDUCTION OF G RADIENT E STIMATES IN RL




Proof. Note that D(t)0 D(t) is symmetric and positive semi-definite and hence its eigenvalues are
real and positive. Label them, in non-increasing order, λ1 , λ2 , . . . . This combined with the relation-
                    0
ship ∑i λi = tr D(t) D(t) , where tr(A) denotes the trace of the matrix A, gives
                          


                                       0 ≤ λ1 ≤ tr D(t)0 D(t) .
                                                             


Furthermore,

                                                πi  (t)                2
                                      ∑ ∑ πk pik − πk
                                                                                               2
                tr D(t)0 D(t) =                                              = Ei∼π dχ2 Pti , π
                             
                                      i∈S k∈S
                                                       (t)
                                             πi pik  (t)
                                   ∑∑                               ∑∑
                                                                                          
                                                                                   (t)
                                 =                   p    − πk    −          πi   p    − πk
                                   i∈S k∈S πk
                                                      ik                           ik
                                                                    i∈S k∈S
                                                                            !
                                                            1
                                 ≤ ∑ max pı̃k − πk               ∑ πi pik
                                                 (t)                    (t)

                                   k∈S  ı̃∈S                π k i∈S

                                 ≤ |S | max ∑ pik − πk
                                                             (t)
                                          i∈S k∈S

                                 = 2 |S | max dTV Pti , π
                                                         
                                            i∈S
                                 ≤ 2 |S | exp (− bt/τc) .

The last inequality follows from Note 3 and Note 4.

    Recall that a reversible Markov chain has a transition probability matrix and stationary distribu-
tion satisfying the detailed balance equations

                                                πi pi j = π j p ji ,

for all i, j.

Lemma 22. Let M = (S , P) be a finite ergodic reversible Markov chain, and let π be its stationary
distribution. Order the eigenvalues of P such that 1 = λ1 > |λ2 | ≥ |λ3 | ≥ . . .. Then

                                            kD(t)kλ = |λ2 |t .

Furthermore, if M has mixing time τ, we have that |λ2 |t ≤ 2 exp (−bt/τc) .

Proof. As P is reversible,

                                   πi (t)         πi         πj                     π j (t)
                               r            r                                 r
                                                                        (t)
                                     p =                               p ji =          p ,           (29)
                                   πj ij          πj         πi                     πi ji

and hence D(t)0 = D(t). Given a polynomial f(·) and the symmetric matrix A, Ax = λx implies
f(A)x = f(λ)x. Thus,
                         q                r         
                                   0
                kD(t)kλ = λmax D(t) D(t) = λmax D(t)2 = max |λi (D(t))| ,
                                        
                                                                                              i


                                                        1515
                                  G REENSMITH , BARTLETT AND BAXTER




where λ1 (D(t)), λ2 (D(t)), . . . are the eigenvalues of D(t). The matrix D(t) is similar to (Pt − eπ0 )
                  1
via the matrix Π 2 , and hence has the same eigenvalues. Let x1 , x2 , x3 , . . . be the left eigenvectors of
P, labelled with the indices of their associated eigenvalues. Then
                                                                        
                                                                            0       i = 1,
               xi P − eπ = xi P − lim P = λi xi − lim λi xi =
                0    t     0       0   t        n      t 0       n 0
                             
                                           n→∞              n→∞               λti xi0 i 6= 1.

Therefore λt2 is the greatest magnitude eigenvalue of D(t). Furthermore, if x 6= 0 is a right eigen-
vector of D(t) with eigenvalue λ, we have

                   πi                                      √
                r 
                                        1
             ∑ πj ij j j                    ∑ ji i π j x j = λxi , from (29),
                                               
                         (t)                       (t)
                        p    − π   x = √          p    − π
            j∈S                          πi j∈S

and so

                                  √                                                    √
                        |λ| ∑                        ∑ ∑
                                                                
                                                                        (t)
                                      πi |xi | =                    p ji − πi                π jx j
                            i∈S                      i∈S j∈S
                                                                                      √
                                                     ∑ ∑ p ji − πi
                                                                 (t)
                                              ≤                                        π j |x j |
                                                     i∈S j∈S
                                                                                             !
                                                                                                       √
                                                        max ∑                                    ∑
                                                                          (t)
                                              ≤                          pik − πk                          π j |x j |
                                                           i∈S k∈S                               j∈S
                                                                  √
                                              = 2 max dTV Pit , π ∑ π j |x j |.
                                                        i∈S                            j∈S

So from Note 3 and Note 4 we have that |λ| ≤ 2 exp(−bt/τc).

Lemma 23. Let M = (S, P) be a finite ergodic Markov chain, and let π be its stationary distribution.
Let {Xt } be the process generated by M starting X0 ∼ π. For any two functions f, g : S → R
                                                          q
   |E [(f(Xs ) − Eπ f(i)) (g(Xs+t ) − Eπ g(i))]| ≤ kD(t)kλ Eπ (f(i) − Eπ f(i))2 Eπ (g(i) − Eπ g(i))2 .



Proof. Denoting f to be the column vector of f(x) − Eπ f(i) over the states x ∈ S , then
                      h          i
                    E fXs gX       = f 0 ΠPt g
                             s+t

                                   = f 0 Π Pt − eπ0 g
                                                    

                                                       1            1
                                          =        f 0 Π 2 D(t)Π 2 g
                                                        1                         1
                                          ≤        f0Π 2        D(t)Π 2 g                         (Schwartz)
                                                            2                          2
                                                                        1              1
                                          ≤ kD(t)kλ f 0 Π 2                           Π2 g                 (Note 2)
                                                                              2               2
                                                   r                         2
                                          = kD(t)kλ             Eπ (fi )2 Eπ gi .


                                                             1516
                       VARIANCE R EDUCTION OF G RADIENT E STIMATES IN RL




    Lemma 23 shows how covariance terms can be bounded by the variance under the stationary
distribution attenuated by the spectral norm of the covariance decay matrix. Combining this with
Lemma 23 (or Lemma 22 for reversible chains) gives us Theorem 2.

Proof of Theorem 2. By the application of Lemma 21 and Lemma 23,

                   |Covπ (t; f)| ≤ kD(t)kλ Varπ (f)       (Lemma 23)
                                     p
                                 ≤     2 |S | exp (−bt/τc)Varπ (f)  (Lemma 21)
                                     p         p
                                 ≤     2 |S | e exp (−t/τ)Varπ (f).

This shows that Theorem 2 holds with some L ≤ 2 |S | e and 0 ≤ α ≤ exp(−1/(2τ)). If the chain
                                                    p

is reversible, then similarly, using Lemma 22, the bound of Theorem 2 holds with L = 2e and
α = exp (−1/τ).

    We can use the result of Theorem 2 to prove Theorem 3. Recall that Theorem 3 shows how the
variance of an average of dependent samples can be bounded by O(1/T ) times the variance of a
sample distributed according to the stationary distribution.

Proof of Theorem 3.
                         !                                            !2
               1 T −1                 1       T −1
           Var   ∑ f(Xt ) =
               T t=0                  T2
                                         E    ∑ (f(Xt ) − Ef(Xt ))
                                              t=0

                                       1 T −1 T −1
                                      T 2 t1∑   ∑ E [(f(Xt1 ) − Ef(Xt1 )) (f(Xt2 ) − Ef(Xt2 ))]
                                  =
                                            =0 t2 =0

                                       1 T −1 T −1
                                      T 2 t1∑   ∑ Covπ (|t2 − t1 | ; f)
                                  =
                                            =0 t2 =0

                                       1 T −1
                                  =          ∑ (T − |t|) Covπ (|t| ; f).
                                      T 2 t=−(T −1)

Then, using Theorem 2,

         1 T −1                                      1 T −1
               ∑ (T − |t|) Covπ (|t| ; f) ≤
        T 2 t=−(T                                          ∑ (T − |t|) Lα|t| Var(f(X))
                                                    T 2 t=−(T
                  −1)                                         −1)
                                                                                !
                                                    L T (1 + α) 2α 1 − αT
                                             =                     −               Var(f(X))
                                                    T2      1−α        (1 − α)2
                                                    1 L (1 + α)
                                                                 
                                             ≤                      Var(f(X)),
                                                    T      1−α

where the equality follows from
           T −1                               T −1         T −1
            ∑        (T − |t|) α|t| = T + 2T ∑ αt − 2 ∑ tαt
         t=−(T −1)                             t=1         t=1


                                                 1517
                               G REENSMITH , BARTLETT AND BAXTER




                                       2T α 1 − αT −1      T −1 T −1
                                                      
                                  = T+                  − 2 ∑ ∑ αt
                                            1−α             s=1 t=s
                                         2T α     2T αT       T −1 T −1
                                             
                                  =  T+         −        − 2 ∑ ∑ αt
                                        1−α       1−α         s=1 t=s
                                       T (1 + α) 2T αT      T −1
                                                                   1 − αT −s
                                  =             −      − 2 ∑ αs
                                         1−α      1−α       s=1      1−α
                                       T (1 + α) 2T αT 2α 1 − αT −1          2 (T − 1) αT
                                                                        
                                  =             −      −                  +
                                         1−α      1−α         (1 − α) 2          1−α
                                       T (1 + α) 2α 1 − αT −1 + 2αT (1 − α)
                                                                 
                                  =             −
                                         1−α                (1 − α)2
                                       T (1 + α) 2α 1 − αT
                                                             
                                  =             −              .
                                         1−α       (1 − α)2

We may set the Ω∗ in Theorem 3 to Ω∗ = L (1 + α) / (1 − α). Furthermore, recalling that α ≤
exp(−1/(2τ)), we have

                                    1+α               1
                           Ω∗ = L       ≤ 2L                   ≤ 6Lτ,
                                    1−α      1 − exp (−1/(2τ))

where the last inequality uses [1 − exp(−1/(2τ))]−1 ≤ 38 τ. Note that for x = 1/(2τ) we have 0 ≤
x ≤ 1/2, and that for such an x

                                                               x2
                                           exp(−x) ≤ 1 − x +
                                                                2
                                                             x
                                 ⇔     1 − exp(−x) ≥ x 1 −
                                                              2                                    (30)
                                             1       1      2
                                 ⇔                 ≤    ·
                                       1 − exp(−x)   x 2−x
                                             1        4
                                 ⇒                 ≤      .
                                       1 − exp(−x)   3x

    Theorem 4 gives a result similar to Theorem 3, but without relying on Theorem 2, and hence
without relying on the size of the state space. For the proof we find it useful to define the following.

Definition 9. The triangular discrimination (Topsøe, 2000) between two distributions p, q on the
finite set S is given by
                                                     (pi − qi )2
                                    d4 (p, q) = ∑
                                              def
                                                                 .
                                                  i∈S pi + qi

Note 5. We have that d4 (p, q) ≤ 2dTV (p, q).

                                 (pi − qi )2     |pi − qi |
    Note 5 can be seen from ∑                =∑             |pi − qi | ≤ ∑ |pi − qi |.
                              i∈S pi + qi     i∈S pi + qi                i∈S


                                                  1518
                           VARIANCE R EDUCTION OF G RADIENT E STIMATES IN RL




Proof of Theorem 4. Write gi = f(i) − Ef(X), and write V = ∑i∈S πi g2i , the variance of f(X). We
have that |gi | ≤ 2c for all i ∈ S . Now, we have for any s ≥ 0 and t ≥ 0,

       E (f(Xs ) − Ef(Xs )) (f(Xs+t ) − Ef(Xs+t ))
         = ∑ πi gi pi j − π j g j
                                 
                           (t)

              i, j∈S
                               (t)
                       √pi j − π j √          q
              ∑ i (t)
                                                 (t)
          =         π q                  π g
                                          i i   pi j + π j g j
            i, j∈S       pi j + π j
                                      2 1/2
                              (t)
                                    π
                                                                             !1/2
                            p ij  −   j
          ≤  ∑ πi ∑                                ∑ πi gi ∑ pi j + π j g j
                                                                       
                                                           2        (t)   2
                                                                                                                  (Schwartz)
                                          
                               (t)
                             pi j + π j
                                           
                i∈S  j∈S                            i∈S       j∈S

                                 !1/2                                  !1/2
                 ∑ πi d4 Pit , π      2V 2 + ∑ πi g2i ∑ pi j − π j g2j
                                                                 
                                                        (t)
          =
                i∈S                                             i∈S          j∈S
                                                                                    !1/2
          ≤ (2dt )1/2 2V 2 + (2c)2 ∑ πi g2i ∑
                                                                        (t)
                                                                       pi j − π j                (Note 5)
                                                 i∈S            j∈S
                 1/2                          1/2
          ≤ 2dt            V 2 + 2c2V dt             .                                                                         (31)

Consider the case where V = Var (f(X)) > ε. If dt ≤ ε, from Equation (31), we have
                                                                  √         1/2
                   E (f(Xs ) − Ef(Xs )) (f(Xs+t ) − Ef(Xs+t )) ≤ 2 2(1 + c)dt V.                                               (32)

This holds for all s,t such that dt ≤ ε, which is implied by
                                        exp (−t/τ + 1) ≤ ε
                                      ⇔          −t/τ ≤ lnε − 1    
                                                                  1
                                      ⇔              t ≥ τ 1 + ln
                                                                  ε
                                                              1
                                      ⇐              t ≥ 2τ ln ,
                                                              ε
as ε ≤ e−1 . For all s,t we have

                                   E (f(Xs ) − Ef(Xs )) (f(Xs+t ) − Ef(Xs+t )) ≤ V,                                            (33)

which is a Cauchy-Schwartz inequality:

                            E (f(Xs ) − Ef(Xs )) (f(Xs+t ) − Ef(Xs+t ))
                                      ∑ πi gi pi j g j
                                                         (t)
                               =
                                     i, j∈S
                                        q           q
                                      ∑
                                             (t)         (t)
                               =         πi pij  gi  πi pi j g j
                                     i, j∈S
                                                                     !1/2                        !         !1/2
                                        ∑ πi g2i ∑ pi j                      ∑ ∑ πi pi j
                                                               (t)                         (t)
                               ≤                                                                     g2j
                                       i∈S               j∈S                 j∈S    i∈S


                                                                      1519
                                 G REENSMITH , BARTLETT AND BAXTER



                                             !1/2                    !1/2
                          =       ∑ πi g2i               ∑ π j g2j
                                  i∈S                    j∈S
                          = V.

So from Equation (32) and Equation (33) we have
                     !
          1 T −1
     Var    ∑ f(Xt )
          T t=0
             1 T −1 T −1
            T 2 t1∑   ∑ E (f(Xt1 ) − Ef(Xt1 )) (f(Xt2 ) − Ef(Xt2 ))
       =
                  =0 t2 =0

             1 T −1                          2 T −2 T −s−1
       =        ∑
            T 2 t=0
                    E (f(Xt ) − Ef(Xt ))2
                                          +     ∑ ∑ E (f(Xs ) − Ef(Xs )) (f(Xs+t ) − Ef(Xs+t ))
                                            T 2 s=0   t=1
             1 T −1                      2 T −1
       =        ∑
            T 2 t=0
                    E (f(X) − Ef(X))2
                                      +     ∑ (T − t)E (f(X0 ) − Ef(X0 )) (f(Xt ) − Ef(Xt ))
                                        T 2 t=1
            1    2 b2τ ln(1/ε)c
       =
            T
              V+ 2
                T       ∑ (T − t)E (f(X0 ) − Ef(X0 )) (f(Xt ) − Ef(Xt ))
                        t=1
                               T −1
                      2
                 +              ∑ (T − t)E (f(X0 ) − Ef(X0 )) (f(Xt ) − Ef(Xt ))
                     T 2 t=b2τ ln(1/ε)c+1
                                 √               ∞
         1              1                                 1/2 1
       ≤
         T
           V + 4τ ln ε−1 V + 4 2(1 + c)
                         T                      ∑         dt
                                                               T
                                                                 V
                                         t=b2τ ln(1/ε)c+1
                                 
                    1               1
       ≤   1 + 4τ ln + 25τ(1 + c)ε    V,                                                          (34)
                    ε               T

where the last line follows from
                          ∞                                    ∞
                         ∑                                 ∑
                                       1/2
                                      dt     ≤                         exp (−t/(2τ) + 1/2)
                   t=b2τ ln(1/ε)c+1              t=b2τ ln(1/ε)c+1
                                                 √           ∞
                                             =       e             ∑        exp (−t/(2τ))
                                                         t=b2τ ln(1/ε)c+1
                                                 √           1 ∞
                                                             
                                             ≤   e exp − ln     ∑ (exp (−1/(2τ)))t
                                                             ε t=0
                                               √            1
                                             =   eε
                                                    1 − exp(−1/(2τ))
                                                √
                                               8 e
                                             ≤      τε,
                                                3
where we have again used Equation (30). For the case where Var (f(X)) ≤ ε we have
                            !
                1 T −1               1 T −1 T −1
           Var     ∑ t
                T t=0
                       f(X )   =
                                    T 2 t1∑   ∑ E (f(Xt1 ) − Ef(Xt1 )) (f(Xt2 ) − Ef(Xt2 ))
                                          =0 t2 =0


                                                          1520
                      VARIANCE R EDUCTION OF G RADIENT E STIMATES IN RL




                                        1 T −1 T −1
                                  ≤
                                       T 2 t1∑   ∑V
                                             =0 t2 =0
                                  ≤ ε.                                                       (35)

As the variance is bounded either by Equation (34) or by Equation (35), taking their sum gives the
result.

   Lastly, we prove the corollary to Theorem 4, which shows the essential rate of decrease of the
bound.

Proof of Corollary 5. Selecting ε such that, writing V = Var(f(X)),
                                       1   T  25
                                         =   + (1 + c),
                                       ε 4τV   4
satisfies 0 ≤ ε ≤ e−1 . Substituting this into the result of Theorem 4 gives
                                !
                    1 T −1                                            100(1 + c)τ2V
                                                               
                                                 4τV
              Var      ∑ t
                   T t=0
                           f(X )    ≤
                                          T + 25(1 + c)τV
                                                             +  1 +
                                                                     T + 25(1 + c)τV
                                                                         
                                                           T     25            V
                                                + 4τ ln        + (1 + c)
                                                          4τV     4            T
                                                                                  
                                          4τV                        T     25          V
                                    ≤          + 1 + 4τ + 4τ ln         + (1 + c)
                                           T                        4τV     4          T
                                                                               −1 !
                                                   V                      1 V         V
                                    ≤ (1 + 8τ) + 4τ ln 7(1 + c) +                       .
                                                   T                      4τ T        T


Appendix C. Proofs for Section 5.1
In this section we give the proofs for Lemma 6 and Theorem 7 in Section 5.1. A few auxiliary
lemmas are also given.

Proof of Lemma 6. Consider F -measurable random variables A, B, with F being some σ-algebra.
If B is also G -measurable for some G ⊂ F such that E[A|G ] = B almost surely, then we have:

                            E [A − B] = 0;      and     E [B(A − B)] = 0

(Note that E[B(A − B)|G ] = BE[A − B|G ] = 0, almost surely). This gives us
                         h          i
          Var(A) = E (A − E[A])2
                         h                                   i
                  = E ((B − E[B]) + (A − B) − E[A − B])2
                         h                       i
                  = E ((B − E[B]) + (A − B))2
                         h                                             i
                  = E (B − E[B])2 + 2 (B − E[B]) (A − B) + (A − B)2
                         h          i
                  = E (B − E[B])2 + 2E [B(A − B)] − 2E[B]E [A − B] + E (A − B)2
                                                                               

                  = Var(B) + E (A − B)2 .
                                          
                                                                                             (36)

                                                 1521
                                    G REENSMITH , BARTLETT AND BAXTER




Now choosing F to be the smallest σ-algebra such that the random variable
(X0 , . . . , XT −1 , J0 , . . . , JT −1 ) and our functions f, J, a, for all Xt , are measurable, and G such
that (X0 , . . . , XT −1 ), and the functions on Xt , are measurable, we have that for

                    1 T −1                                                1 T −1
               A=     ∑ f(Xt ) (Jt − a(Xt ))
                    T t=0
                                                          and        B=     ∑ f(Xt ) (J(Xt ) − a(Xt )) ,
                                                                          T t=0

A and B are F -measurable, B is G -measurable, and G ⊂ F . Furthermore, we have
                                    "                                              #
                                      1 T −1
                   E [ A| G ] = E        ∑ f(Xt ) (Jt − a(Xt )) X0 , . . . , XT −1
                                      T t=0
                                               1 T −1
                                        =        ∑ E [ f(Xt ) (Jt − a(Xt ))| Xt ]
                                               T t=0
                                               1 T −1
                                        =        ∑ f(Xt ) (E [ Jt | Xt ] − a(Xt ))
                                               T t=0
                                          1 T −1
                                        =    ∑ f(Xt ) (J(Xt ) − a(Xt ))
                                          T t=0
                                        = B.

The proof then follows from Equation 36.

    The proof of Theorem 7 requires some additional tools. In addition to (10) we also consider a
variation of GPOMDP where a fixed length chain is used to estimate the discounted value function:

                            (S) def 1   ∇µUt (Yt ) (S)
                                        T −1                                    t+S−1
                                     ∑                                           ∑ βs−t r(Xs ).
                                                                      (S) def
                          ∆T =                     J ,               Jt   =
                                   T t=0 µUt (Yt ) t+1                           s=t



Lemma 24. Let D = (S , U , Y , P, ν, r, µ) be a controlled POMDP satisfying Assumptions 1, 2 and 3.
Then
                                         (+S)    (S)      BR S
                                       ∆T − ∆T ≤             β ,
                                                         1−β
and similarly,
                                                   (∞)     (S)        BR S
                                                 ∆T − ∆T         ≤       β ,
                                                                     1−β
         (∞)              (S)
where ∆T denotes ∆T in the limit as S → ∞.

Proof.

                                            1 T −1 ∇µUt (Yt ) (+S) 1 T −1 ∇µUt (Yt ) (S)
                                              ∑ µU (Yt ) Jt+1 − T ∑ µU (Yt ) Jt+1
                 (+S)      (S)
               ∆T       − ∆T      =
                                            T t=0    t               t=0    t


                                            1 T −1 ∇µUt (Yt )    c
                                  =           ∑ µU (Yt ) ∑ βs−t−1 r(Xs ) ,
                                            T t=0
                                                                                              c = T +S
                                                     t        s=t+1+S


                                                            1522
                             VARIANCE R EDUCTION OF G RADIENT E STIMATES IN RL




                                             1 T −1 c
                                    ≤ BR       ∑ ∑ βs−t−1
                                             T t=0 s=t+1+S

                                             1 T −1 βS (1 − βc−S−t−1 )
                                    = BR        ∑
                                             T t=0         1−β
                                           BR S
                                    ≤          β .
                                          1−β
                         (∞)       (S)
Obtain the bound ∆T − ∆T                 similarly by considering the limit as c → ∞.

Lemma 25. Let D = (S , U , Y , P, ν, r, µ) be a controlled POMDP satisfying Assumptions 1, 2 and 3.
Let {Zt } = {Xt ,Yt ,Ut , Xt+1 } be the process generated by D. For any a : S × Y × U × S → R satis-
fying |a(·)| ≤ M, we have
                                                  !                                         !
              1 T −1 ∇µUt (Yt )  (+S)                         1 T −1 ∇µUt (Yt )  (S)
                 ∑ µU (Yt ) Jt+1 − a(Zt )                        ∑ µU (Yt ) Jt+1 − a(Zt )
                                                                                         
        Var                                          ≤ Var
              T t=0        t                                  T t=0     t

                                                                   5B2 R (R + M) S
                                                               +                β
                                                                     (1 − β)2
and similarly,
                                         !                                   !
              1 T −1 ∇µUt (Yt )  (S)            1 T −1 ∇µUt (Yt )  (∞)
                ∑ µU (Yt ) Jt+1 − a(Zt )           ∑ µU (Yt ) Jt+1 − a(Zt )
                                                                          
          Var                              ≤ Var
              T t=0    t                         T t=0    t

                                                                   5B2 R (R + M) S
                                                               +                β ,
                                                                     (1 − β)2
          (∞)            (S)
where Jt        denotes Jt     in the limit as S → ∞.
Proof.
                                   !
        1 T −1 ∇µUt (Yt )  (+S)
          ∑ µU (Yt ) Jt+1 − a(Zt )
                                  
    Var
        T t=0    t

                                                                                              2
                                                         "                                     #!
               1 T −1 ∇µUt (Yt )  (+S)                    1 T −1 ∇µUt (Yt )  (+S)
                  ∑ µU (Yt ) Jt+1 − a(Zt ) − E T ∑ µU (Yt ) Jt+1 − a(Zt )
                                                  
         = E
               T t=0      t                                   t=0      t
                                                       "                                     #
               1 T −1
                      ∇µUt (Yt ) (S)                      1 T −1
                                                                 ∇µUt (Yt )  (S)
                  ∑ µU (Yt ) Jt+1 − a(Zt ) − E T ∑ µU (Yt ) Jt+1 − a(Zt )
                                                                                        
         = E
               T t=0      t                                 t=0      t
                                         h              i2
                      (+S)      (S)          (+S)     (S)
                + ∆T − ∆T − E ∆T − ∆T
                                                     !
                 1 T −1 ∇µUt (Yt )  (S)                                 (S) 2
                                                                                                    i2
                    ∑
                                                                              h
                                                               (+S)                     (+S)    (S)
         = Var                        Jt+1 − a(Zt )    + E ∆T − ∆T             − E ∆T − ∆T
                 T t=0 µUt (Yt )
                                                                                                 0
                 "                                            "                                  #!
                     1 T −1 ∇µUt (Yt )  (S)                    1 T −1 ∇µUt (Yt )  (S)
                        ∑ µU (Yt ) Jt+1 − a(Zt ) − E T ∑ µU (Yt ) Jt+1 − a(Zt )
                                                       
           + 2E
                     T t=0      t                                 t=0       t
                                   i
                      (+S)      (S)
                × ∆T − ∆T

                                                        1523
                                 G REENSMITH , BARTLETT AND BAXTER



                                                 !
               1 T −1 ∇µUt (Yt )  (S)                           (S) 2
                 ∑
                                               
                                                        (+S)
        ≤ Var                     Jt+1 − a(Zt )    + E ∆T − ∆T
               T t=0 µUt (Yt )
               "                                                                      !
                    1 T −1 ∇µUt (Yt )  (S)                 1 T −1 ∇µUt (Yt )  (S)
                       ∑ µU (Yt ) Jt+1 − a(Zt ) + E T ∑ µU (Yt ) Jt+1 − a(Zt )
                                                                                   
          + 2E
                    T t=0       t                             t=0      t
                                  i
                    (+S)     (S)
               × ∆T − ∆T
                                                 ! 
               1 T −1 ∇µUt (Yt )  (S)                 BR S 2
                                                              
                 ∑ µU (Yt ) Jt+1 − a(Zt ) + 1 − β β
                                               
        ≤ Var
               T t=0     t


                  1 T −1 ∇µUt (Yt )  (S)            BR
            + 4E     ∑ µU (Yt ) t+1
                 T t=0
                                      J   − a(Z  t )
                                                        1 − β
                                                              βS     (Lemma 24)
                            t
                                                    ! 
                1 T −1 ∇µUt (Yt )  (S)                     BR S 2
                                                                   
                   ∑ µU (Yt ) Jt+1 − a(Zt ) + 1 − β β
                                                 
        ≤ Var
               T t=0      t

                B (R + M(1 − β))
                                                  
                                           BR S
          +4                                    β
                       1−β                1−β
                                                    !
                1 T −1 ∇µUt (Yt )  (S)                   5B2 R (R + M) S
                   ∑ µU (Yt ) t+1
                                                 
        ≤ Var                       J   −  a(Zt )      +                β .
               T t=0      t                                 (1 − β)2

                                           (+S)         (S)       (S)         (∞)          (+S)     (S)
Obtain the second result by replacing Jt          with Jt , and Jt      with Jt     ; then ∆T     − ∆T becomes
 (S)    (∞)
∆T − ∆T .

      Using these Lemmas, and Theorem 4, we can now prove Theorem 7.

Proof of Theorem 7. In this proof we will apply Theorem 4 to show that the variance of the sample
average is O(ln(T )/T ) times the variance of a single sample, and we will apply Lemma 6 to show
that the additional variance due to estimating the value function need not be considered. We first
use Lemma 25 to convert each of the samples within the average to be functions on a fixed length
of the chain, that is, functions on states of the Markov process {Xt ,Yt ,Ut , . . . ,Ut+S−1 , Xt+S }. We can
then use Theorem 4 for the sample average of functions on this process. Write

                                            ∇µu (y)
                                                                           
                                                                           
                               V = Varπ             Jβ ( j) − a(i, y, u, j) ,
                                            µu (y)
                                          "                             #
                                               ∇µu (y)                  2
                                 E = Eπ                J ( j) − Jβ ( j)     ,
                                                µu (y)

and
                                                  5B2 R(R + M) S
                                          C=                  β ,
                                                    (1 − β)2
note that
                                   ∇µUt (Yt )  (S)             1 C1
                             1+                Jt+1 − a(Zt )    ≤ ·    ,
                                    µUt (Yt )                 ∞  7 1−β

                                                     1524
                     VARIANCE R EDUCTION OF G RADIENT E STIMATES IN RL




where kak∞ is the maximum of the magnitudes of the components of vector a, and denote the mixing
time of the process {Xt ,Yt ,Ut , . . . ,Ut+S−1 , Xt+S } by τ̃. We have
                                                         !
                 1 T −1 ∇µUt (Yt )  (+S)
                    ∑ µU (Yt ) Jt+1 − a(Zt )
                                                       
           Var
                 T t=0       t
                                                                !
                         1 T −1 ∇µUt (Yt )  (S)
                            ∑ µU (Yt ) Jt+1 − a(Zt ) +C (Lemma 25)
                                                              
              ≤ Var
                        T t=0           t

                                                                     ∇µU0 (Y0 )  (S)
                                                                                         
                                25 C1                   1 1
              ≤ Kε + 1 + τ̃                  ε + 4τ̃ ln        Var               J1 − a(Z0 )
                                 7 1−β                  ε T           µU0 (Y0 )
                       +C            (Theorem 4)
                                                                     ∇µU0 (Y0 )  (∞)
                                                                                          
                                25 C1                   1 1
              ≤ Kε + 1 + τ̃                  ε + 4τ̃ ln        Var               J1 − a(Z0 )
                                 7 1−β                  ε T           µU0 (Y0 )
                                                           
                                    25 C1                 1 C
                       + 1 + τ̃                ε + 4τ̃ ln         +C       (Lemma 25)
                                     7 1−β                ε T
                                                                         
                                25 C1                   1      V E C
              = Kε + 1 + τ̃                  ε + 4τ̃ ln          + +           +C     (Lemma 6).
                                 7 1−β                  ε      T T T
Here, Theorem 4 was applied to each of the K dimensions of the quantity the variance is taken
over (recall that we consider the variance of a vector quantity to be the sum of the variance of its
components). Now, similar to the proof of Corollary 5, we choose

                                   K V E C −1 25 C1
                                                   
                              1
                                =         + +           + ·          ,
                              ε 4τ̃ T T T                  28 1 − β
giving
                                                  !
              1 T −1 ∇µUt (Yt )  (+S)
                 ∑ µU (Yt ) Jt+1 − a(Zt )
                                                
          Var
              T t=0     t
                                                            
                           25 C1                 1    V E C
            ≤ Kε + 1 + τ̃             ε + 4τ̃ ln        + +      +C
                            7 1−β                ε    T T T
                                 
                     V E C
            ≤ 4τ̃      + +          + [1 + 4τ̃
                     T T T
                                                          !# 
                                         K V E C −1
                                                                             
                          25 C1                                  V E C
               + 4τ̃ ln      ·       +           + +                 + +        +C
                          28 1 − β 4τ̃ T T T                     T T T
                   τ̃           τ̃           τ̃
                                            
            ≤ h       V +h         E +h         C +C
                  T             T           T
                  τ ln(e(S + 1))            τ ln(e(S + 1))        τ ln(e(S + 1))
                                                                             
            ≤ h                    V +h                    E +h                  C +C,
                         T                          T                   T
where the last line follows from τ̃ ≤ τ ln(e(S + 1)) (Lemma 1), and from h being an increasing
function. Lastly, we have
          τ ln(e(S + 1))
                         
      h                  C +C
                T

                                               1525
                                 G REENSMITH , BARTLETT AND BAXTER



             
                 1      ln e(S + 1)
       ≤           + 8τ
                 T           T
                                                                           S −1 !   !
              ln(e(S + 1))        C1                 K(1 − β)2              β
         + 4τ               ln         +                                            +1 C
                    T            1 − β 20τB2 R (R + M) ln(e(S + 1)) T
         
           1      ln e(S + 1)       ln(T ) ln(e(S + 1))
       ≤     + 8τ              + 4τ
           T            T                    T
                                                                       K(1 − β)2
                                                                                     
              S ln(e(S + 1)) 1          ln(e(S + 1))        C1
         + 4τ                 ln + 4τ                 ln         +                   +1 C
                     T          β             T            1 − β 20τB2 R (R + M)
                                         K(1 − β)2
                                                  
           2C2         1         C1                      (T + S) ln(e(S + 1)) S
       ≤           ln    + ln         +                                      β .
         (1 − β)2     β         1−β          C2                   T

The second step has used the increasing property of ln, along with ln(e(S + 1)) ≥ 1 and βS /T ≤ 1.
This gives us, for any A, B ≥ 0,
                              S −1 !                S −1 !                  S −1 !
                      B         β                      β                         β
        ln A +                          ≤ ln A + B              ≤ ln (A + B)              .
                 ln(e(S + 1)) T                         T                        T


Appendix D. Value Function Example
Here we consider a somewhat less trivial example than that presented in Section 6.2—an example
of reducing variance through appropriate choice of value function. A toy MDP is shown in Figure 7.
Here action a1 causes the MDP to have a tendency to stay in state s1 , and action a2 causes the MDP
to have a tendency to move away from s1 and stay in state s2 and s3 .

                     0.75                                       0.25

                      s1                                         s1

        0.7                      5                    0.2                      5
           5                  0.2                        5                  0.7
                    P(a1 )                                      P(a2 )

        s3                       s2                   s3                      s2
   5                                    0.2       5                                 0.7
0.2                  0.75                  5   0.7              0.25                   5

       Figure 7: Transition probabilities for a toy 3 state, 2 action Markov decision process

   Now consider the resultant controlled MDP when the single parameter, state independent policy

                                         eθ                                 e−θ
                             µa1 =                    µa2 = 1 − µa1 =
                                      eθ + e−θ                           eθ + e−θ
along with any reward function satisfying Assumption 2 is used. Note that this controlled MDP
satisfies Assumptions 1, 2 and 3 for all θ. For the policy at θ = 0 we have µa1 = µa2 = 0.5 and

                                       ∇µa1 = 0.5          ∇µa2 = −0.5.

                                                      1526
                      VARIANCE R EDUCTION OF G RADIENT E STIMATES IN RL




The transition matrix and stationary distribution of the resultant chain are:
                                                                     
                                   0.5 0.5 0                       1/3
                           P =  0 0.5 0.5                π =  1/3  .
                                   0.5 0 0.5                       1/3
     In this case the 1 × 3 matrix G = (1/6, −1/6, 0), and the right null space of G is {α1 v1 + α2 v2 :
α1 , α2 ∈ R}, where                                         
                                              1                  0
                                        1  
                                  v1 = √      1         v2 =    0 .
                                         2    0                  1
Any value function of the form V = Jβ + α1 v1 + α2 v2 will produce an unbiased estimate of ∇β η. In
this case we have that, writing ri = r(si ),
                                               (2 − β)2 β(2 − β)       β2
                                                                                   
                                                                                   r1
                                      2
          Jβ = (I − βP)−1 r =                     β2      (2 − β)2 β(2 − β)   r2  .
                               (2 − β)3 − β3
                                             
                                               β(2 − β)      β2     (2 − β)2       r3
If we select β = 0.9 this becomes
                                                                            
                      1.21 0.99 0.81     r1             1.21r1 + 0.99r2 + 0.81r3
               1                                 1    0.81r1 + 1.21r2 + 0.99r3  .
      J0.9 =          0.81 1.21 0.99   r2  =
             0.301                              0.301
                      0.99 0.81 1.21     r3             0.99r1 + 0.81r2 + 1.21r3
If we had r = (1/10, 2/11, 0)0 then we would again have J0.9 [= (1, 1, 81/99)0 ] in the right null
space of G, and we could again choose V = 0 to obtain a zero bias, zero variance estimate of ∇β η.
Consider instead the reward function
                                         
                                           4.515       i = s1
                                  r(i) =
                                           0      otherwise,
so that J0.9 = (18.15, 12.15, 14.85)0 and ∇0.9 η = 1. We now have
                    ∇µu (i)                    ∇µu (i)                 ∇µu (i)
                                                             2                    2
             Varπ           J0.9 ( j)  = Eπ            J0.9 ( j) − Eπ          J0.9 ( j)
                     µu (i)                     µu (i)                  µu (i)
                                     = Eπ (J0.9 ( j))2 − 1
                                             18.152
                                                      

                                     = π0  12.152  − 1
                                             14.852
                                     = 231.5225.
                                                                                              √
The second line is obtained from |∇µu (i)/µu (i)| = 1 and ∇0.9 η = 1. If we choose α1 = −15.15 2
and α2 = −14.85 then, for the value function V = Jβ + α1 v1 + α2 v2 , we have

                    ∇µu (i)                   ∇µu (i)                  ∇µu (i)
                                                        2                     2
            Varπ            V( j)  = Eπ               V( j) − Eπ               V( j)
                    µu (i)                     µu (i)                   µu (i)
                                              (18.15 − 15.15)2
                                                                

                                   = π   0
                                              (12.15 − 15.15)2  − 1
                                                       0
                                   = 5;

                                                 1527
                               G REENSMITH , BARTLETT AND BAXTER




a significant reduction in variance, with no additional bias.

References
D. Aberdeen. A survey of approximate methods for solving partially observable markov decision
  processes. Technical report, Research School of Information Science and Engineering, Australian
  National University, Australia, 2002.
L. Baird. Gradient descent for general reinforcement learning. In S. A. Solla M. S Kearns and D. A.
   Cohn, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 11. The MIT Press,
   1999.
P. L. Bartlett and J. Baxter. Estimation and approximation bounds for gradient-based reinforcement
   learning. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 64(1):133–150, February 2002.
A. G. Barto, R. S. Sutton, and C. W. Anderson. Neuronlike adaptive elements that can solve difficult
  learning control problems. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 13:834–846,
  1983.
J. Baxter and P. L. Bartlett. Infinite-horizon policy-gradient estimation. Journal of Artificial Intelli-
   gence Research, 15:319–350, 2001.
J. Baxter, P. L. Bartlett, and L. Weaver. Experiments with infinite-horizon policy-gradient estima-
   tion. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 15:351–381, 2001.
S. J. Bradtke and A. Barto. Linear least-squares algorithms for temporal difference learning. Ma-
   chine Learning, 262:33–57, 1996.
P. Dayan. Reinforcement comparison. In Proceedings of the 1990 Connectionist Models Summer
   School, pages 45–51. Morgan Kaufmann, 1990.
J. L. Doob. Measure Theory. Number 143 in Graduate Texts in Mathematics. Springer-Verlag, New
   York, 1994.
M. Evans and T. Swartz. Approximating integrals via Monte Carlo and deterministic methods.
 Oxford statistical science series. Oxford University Press, Oxford; New York, 2000.
G. S. Fishman. Monte Carlo: Concepts, Algorithms and Applications. Springer series in operations
  research. Springer-Verlag, New York, 1996.
P. W. Glynn. Likelihood ratio gradient estimation for stochastic systems. Communications of the
   ACM, 33(10):75–84, 1990.
P. W. Glynn and P. L‘Ecuyer. Likelihood ratio gradient estimation for regenerative stochastic recur-
   sions. Advances in Applied Probability, 12(4):1019–1053, 1995.
G. R. Grimmett and D. R. Stirzaker. Probability and Random Processes. Oxford University Press,
  Oxford, 1992.
J. M. Hammersley and D. C. Handscomb. Monte Carlo Methods. Chapman and Hall, New York,
   1965.

                                                  1528
                      VARIANCE R EDUCTION OF G RADIENT E STIMATES IN RL




T. Jaakkola, S. P. Singh, and M. I. Jordan. Reinforcement learning algorithm for partially observable
   Markov decision problems. In G. Tesauro, D. Touretzky, and T. Leen, editors, Advances in Neural
   Information Processing Systems, volume 6, pages 345–352. The MIT Press, 1995.

L. P. Kaelbling, M. L. Littman, and A. R. Cassandra. Planning and acting in partially observable
  stochastic domains. Artificial Intelligence, 101:99–134, 1998.

H. Kimura and S. Kobayashi. An analysis of actor/critic algorithms using eligibility traces: Re-
  inforcement learning with imperfect value functions. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pages 278–286, 1998a.

H. Kimura and S. Kobayashi. Reinforcement learning for continuous action using stochastic gradi-
  ent ascent. In Intelligent Autonomous Systems, volume 5, pages 288–295, 1998b.

H. Kimura, K. Miyazaki, and S. Kobayashi. Reinforcement learning in POMDPs with function
  approximation. In D. H. Fisher, editor, International Conference on Machine Learning, pages
  152–160, 1997.

H. Kimura, M. Yamamura, and S. Kobayashi. Reinforcement learning by stochastic hill climbing
  on discounted reward. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 295–303, 1995.

V. R. Konda and J. N. Tsitsiklis. Actor-critic algorithms. In T. K. Leen S. A. Solla and K. Müller,
   editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 12. The MIT Press, 2000.

V. R. Konda and J. N. Tsitsiklis. On actor-critic algorithms. SIAM Journal on Control and Opti-
   mization, 42(4):1143–1166, 2003.

W. S. Lovejoy. A survey of algorithmic methods for partially observed markov decision processes.
  Annals of Operations Research, 28:47–66, 1991.

P. Marbach and J. N. Tsitsiklis. Simulation-based optimization of markov reward processes. IEEE
   Transactions on Automatic Control, 46(2):191–209, February 2001.

M. L. Puterman. Markov Decision Processes: Discrete Stochastic Dynamic Programming. Wiley
 series in probability and mathematical statistics. Applied probability and statistics. John Wiley &
 Sons, New York, 1994.

M. I. Reiman and A. Weiss. Sensitivity analysis for simulations via likelihood ratios. Operations
 Research, 37, 1989.

R. Y. Rubinstein. How to optimize complex stochastic systems from a single sample path by the
  score function method. Annals of Operations Research, 27:175–211, 1991.

E. Seneta. Non-negative Matrices and Markov Chains. Springer series in statistics. Springer-Verlag,
   New York, 1981.

S. P. Singh, T. Jaakkola, and M. I. Jordan. Learning without state-estimation in partially observable
   markovian decision processes. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 284–
   292, 1994.

                                                1529
                             G REENSMITH , BARTLETT AND BAXTER




R. S. Sutton. Learning to predict by the methods of temporal differences. Machine Learning, 3:
  9–44, 1988.

R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. MIT Press, Cambridge
  MA, 1998.

R. S. Sutton, D. McAllester, S. Singh, and Y. Mansour. Policy gradient methods for reinforcement
  learning with function approximation. In T. K. Leen S. A. Solla and K. Müller, editors, Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 12. The MIT Press, 2000.

F. Topsøe. Some inequalities for information divergence and related measures of discrimination.
   IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 46:1602–1609, 2000.

R. J. Williams. Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforcement
  learning. Machine Learning, 8:229–256, 1992.




                                               1530
